<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>The Brothers Karamazov</title>
      <author><name reg="Dostoyevsky, Fyodor">Fyodor Dostoyevsky</name></author>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>February 12, 2009</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">28054</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
      <language id="fr"></language>
      <language id="la"></language>
      <language id="de"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2009-02-12">February 12, 2009</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by David Edwards, David King, and the Online Distributed
            Proofreading Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
            (This file was produced from images generously made available
            by The Internet Archive).
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">The Brothers Karamazov</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Translated from the Russian of</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">Fyodor Dostoyevsky</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">by Constance Garnett</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">The Lowell Press</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">New York</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>

  </front>
<body>

<pb n='001'/><anchor id='Pg001'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Part I</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Book I. The History Of A Family</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I. Fyodor Pavlovitch Karamazov</head>

<p>
Alexey Fyodorovitch Karamazov was the third son
of Fyodor Pavlovitch Karamazov, a land owner well known
in our district in his own day, and still remembered among us owing
to his gloomy and tragic death, which happened thirteen years ago,
and which I shall describe in its proper place. For the present I
will only say that this <q>landowner</q>&mdash;for so we used to call him,
although he hardly spent a day of his life on his own estate&mdash;was a
strange type, yet one pretty frequently to be met with, a type abject
and vicious and at the same time senseless. But he was one of those
senseless persons who are very well capable of looking after their
worldly affairs, and, apparently, after nothing else. Fyodor Pavlovitch,
for instance, began with next to nothing; his estate was of
the smallest; he ran to dine at other men's tables, and fastened on
them as a toady, yet at his death it appeared that he had a hundred
thousand roubles in hard cash. At the same time, he was all his life
one of the most senseless, fantastical fellows in the whole district.
I repeat, it was not stupidity&mdash;the majority of these fantastical fellows
are shrewd and intelligent enough&mdash;but just senselessness, and
a peculiar national form of it.
</p>

<p>
He was married twice, and had three sons, the eldest, Dmitri, by
his first wife, and two, Ivan and Alexey, by his second. Fyodor
Pavlovitch's first wife, Adelaïda Ivanovna, belonged to a fairly
rich and distinguished noble family, also landowners in our district,
the Miüsovs. How it came to pass that an heiress, who was also
a beauty, and moreover one of those vigorous, intelligent girls, so
<pb n='002'/><anchor id='Pg002'/>
common in this generation, but sometimes also to be found in the
last, could have married such a worthless, puny weakling, as we all
called him, I won't attempt to explain. I knew a young lady of the
last <q>romantic</q> generation who after some years of an enigmatic
passion for a gentleman, whom she might quite easily have married
at any moment, invented insuperable obstacles to their union, and
ended by throwing herself one stormy night into a rather deep and
rapid river from a high bank, almost a precipice, and so perished,
entirely to satisfy her own caprice, and to be like Shakespeare's
Ophelia. Indeed, if this precipice, a chosen and favorite spot of hers,
had been less picturesque, if there had been a prosaic flat bank in
its place, most likely the suicide would never have taken place.
This is a fact, and probably there have been not a few similar
instances in the last two or three generations. Adelaïda Ivanovna
Miüsov's action was similarly, no doubt, an echo of other people's
ideas, and was due to the irritation caused by lack of mental freedom.
She wanted, perhaps, to show her feminine independence, to
override class distinctions and the despotism of her family. And a
pliable imagination persuaded her, we must suppose, for a brief
moment, that Fyodor Pavlovitch, in spite of his parasitic position,
was one of the bold and ironical spirits of that progressive epoch,
though he was, in fact, an ill-natured buffoon and nothing more.
What gave the marriage piquancy was that it was preceded by an
elopement, and this greatly captivated Adelaïda Ivanovna's fancy.
Fyodor Pavlovitch's position at the time made him specially eager
for any such enterprise, for he was passionately anxious to make a
career in one way or another. To attach himself to a good family
and obtain a dowry was an alluring prospect. As for mutual love
it did not exist apparently, either in the bride or in him, in spite
of Adelaïda Ivanovna's beauty. This was, perhaps, a unique case of
the kind in the life of Fyodor Pavlovitch, who was always of a
voluptuous temper, and ready to run after any petticoat on the
slightest encouragement. She seems to have been the only woman
who made no particular appeal to his senses.
</p>

<p>
Immediately after the elopement Adelaïda Ivanovna discerned
in a flash that she had no feeling for her husband but contempt.
The marriage accordingly showed itself in its true colors with
extraordinary rapidity. Although the family accepted the event
<pb n='003'/><anchor id='Pg003'/>
pretty quickly and apportioned the runaway bride her dowry, the
husband and wife began to lead a most disorderly life, and there
were everlasting scenes between them. It was said that the young
wife showed incomparably more generosity and dignity than Fyodor
Pavlovitch, who, as is now known, got hold of all her money up
to twenty-five thousand roubles as soon as she received it, so that
those thousands were lost to her for ever. The little village and the
rather fine town house which formed part of her dowry he did his
utmost for a long time to transfer to his name, by means of some
deed of conveyance. He would probably have succeeded, merely
from her moral fatigue and desire to get rid of him, and from the
contempt and loathing he aroused by his persistent and shameless
importunity. But, fortunately, Adelaïda Ivanovna's family intervened
and circumvented his greediness. It is known for a fact
that frequent fights took place between the husband and wife, but
rumor had it that Fyodor Pavlovitch did not beat his wife but
was beaten by her, for she was a hot-tempered, bold, dark-browed,
impatient woman, possessed of remarkable physical strength. Finally,
she left the house and ran away from Fyodor Pavlovitch with a
destitute divinity student, leaving Mitya, a child of three years old,
in her husband's hands. Immediately Fyodor Pavlovitch introduced
a regular harem into the house, and abandoned himself to orgies of
drunkenness. In the intervals he used to drive all over the province,
complaining tearfully to each and all of Adelaïda Ivanovna's having
left him, going into details too disgraceful for a husband to
mention in regard to his own married life. What seemed to gratify
him and flatter his self-love most was to play the ridiculous part
of the injured husband, and to parade his woes with embellishments.
</p>

<p>
<q>One would think that you'd got a promotion, Fyodor Pavlovitch,
you seem so pleased in spite of your sorrow,</q> scoffers said
to him. Many even added that he was glad of a new comic part
in which to play the buffoon, and that it was simply to make it
funnier that he pretended to be unaware of his ludicrous position.
But, who knows, it may have been simplicity. At last he succeeded
in getting on the track of his runaway wife. The poor woman
turned out to be in Petersburg, where she had gone with her divinity
student, and where she had thrown herself into a life of complete
emancipation. Fyodor Pavlovitch at once began bustling about,
<pb n='004'/><anchor id='Pg004'/>
making preparations to go to Petersburg, with what object he could
not himself have said. He would perhaps have really gone; but
having determined to do so he felt at once entitled to fortify himself
for the journey by another bout of reckless drinking. And just
at that time his wife's family received the news of her death in
Petersburg. She had died quite suddenly in a garret, according to
one story, of typhus, or as another version had it, of starvation.
Fyodor Pavlovitch was drunk when he heard of his wife's death, and
the story is that he ran out into the street and began shouting with
joy, raising his hands to Heaven: <q>Lord, now lettest Thou Thy
servant depart in peace,</q> but others say he wept without restraint
like a little child, so much so that people were sorry for him, in
spite of the repulsion he inspired. It is quite possible that both versions
were true, that he rejoiced at his release, and at the same time
wept for her who released him. As a general rule, people, even the
wicked, are much more naïve and simple-hearted than we suppose.
And we ourselves are, too.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II. He Gets Rid Of His Eldest Son</head>

<p>
You can easily imagine what a father such a man could be and
how he would bring up his children. His behavior as a father
was exactly what might be expected. He completely abandoned the
child of his marriage with Adelaïda Ivanovna, not from malice,
nor because of his matrimonial grievances, but simply because he
forgot him. While he was wearying every one with his tears and
complaints, and turning his house into a sink of debauchery, a faithful
servant of the family, Grigory, took the three-year-old Mitya
into his care. If he hadn't looked after him there would have been
no one even to change the baby's little shirt.
</p>

<p>
It happened moreover that the child's relations on his mother's
side forgot him too at first. His grandfather was no longer living,
his widow, Mitya's grandmother, had moved to Moscow, and was
seriously ill, while his daughters were married, so that Mitya remained
for almost a whole year in old Grigory's charge and lived
<pb n='005'/><anchor id='Pg005'/>
with him in the servant's cottage. But if his father had remembered
him (he could not, indeed, have been altogether unaware of his
existence) he would have sent him back to the cottage, as the child
would only have been in the way of his debaucheries. But a cousin
of Mitya's mother, Pyotr Alexandrovitch Miüsov, happened to return
from Paris. He lived for many years afterwards abroad, but
was at that time quite a young man, and distinguished among the
Miüsovs as a man of enlightened ideas and of European culture,
who had been in the capitals and abroad. Towards the end of his
life he became a Liberal of the type common in the forties and fifties.
In the course of his career he had come into contact with
many of the most Liberal men of his epoch, both in Russia and
abroad. He had known Proudhon and Bakunin personally, and in
his declining years was very fond of describing the three days of the
Paris Revolution of February 1848, hinting that he himself had
almost taken part in the fighting on the barricades. This was one
of the most grateful recollections of his youth. He had an independent
property of about a thousand souls, to reckon in the old
style. His splendid estate lay on the outskirts of our little town and
bordered on the lands of our famous monastery, with which Pyotr
Alexandrovitch began an endless lawsuit, almost as soon as he
came into the estate, concerning the rights of fishing in the river or
wood-cutting in the forest, I don't know exactly which. He regarded
it as his duty as a citizen and a man of culture to open an
attack upon the <q>clericals.</q> Hearing all about Adelaïda Ivanovna,
whom he, of course, remembered, and in whom he had at one time
been interested, and learning of the existence of Mitya, he intervened,
in spite of all his youthful indignation and contempt for
Fyodor Pavlovitch. He made the latter's acquaintance for the first
time, and told him directly that he wished to undertake the child's
education. He used long afterwards to tell as a characteristic touch,
that when he began to speak of Mitya, Fyodor Pavlovitch looked
for some time as though he did not understand what child he was
talking about, and even as though he was surprised to hear that he
had a little son in the house. The story may have been exaggerated,
yet it must have been something like the truth.
</p>

<p>
Fyodor Pavlovitch was all his life fond of acting, of suddenly
playing an unexpected part, sometimes without any motive for doing
<pb n='006'/><anchor id='Pg006'/>
so, and even to his own direct disadvantage, as, for instance,
in the present case. This habit, however, is characteristic of a very
great number of people, some of them very clever ones, not like
Fyodor Pavlovitch. Pyotr Alexandrovitch carried the business
through vigorously, and was appointed, with Fyodor Pavlovitch,
joint guardian of the child, who had a small property, a house and
land, left him by his mother. Mitya did, in fact, pass into this
cousin's keeping, but as the latter had no family of his own, and
after securing the revenues of his estates was in haste to return at
once to Paris, he left the boy in charge of one of his cousins, a lady
living in Moscow. It came to pass that, settling permanently in
Paris he, too, forgot the child, especially when the Revolution of
February broke out, making an impression on his mind that he remembered
all the rest of his life. The Moscow lady died, and Mitya
passed into the care of one of her married daughters. I believe
he changed his home a fourth time later on. I won't enlarge upon
that now, as I shall have much to tell later of Fyodor Pavlovitch's
firstborn, and must confine myself now to the most essential facts
about him, without which I could not begin my story.
</p>

<p>
In the first place, this Mitya, or rather Dmitri Fyodorovitch, was
the only one of Fyodor Pavlovitch's three sons who grew up in the
belief that he had property, and that he would be independent on
coming of age. He spent an irregular boyhood and youth. He did
not finish his studies at the gymnasium, he got into a military school,
then went to the Caucasus, was promoted, fought a duel, and was
degraded to the ranks, earned promotion again, led a wild life, and
spent a good deal of money. He did not begin to receive any income
from Fyodor Pavlovitch until he came of age, and until then
got into debt. He saw and knew his father, Fyodor Pavlovitch, for
the first time on coming of age, when he visited our neighborhood
on purpose to settle with him about his property. He seems not to
have liked his father. He did not stay long with him, and made
haste to get away, having only succeeded in obtaining a sum of
money, and entering into an agreement for future payments from
the estate, of the revenues and value of which he was unable (a fact
worthy of note), upon this occasion, to get a statement from his
father. Fyodor Pavlovitch remarked for the first time then (this,
too, should be noted) that Mitya had a vague and exaggerated idea
<pb n='007'/><anchor id='Pg007'/>
of his property. Fyodor Pavlovitch was very well satisfied with
this, as it fell in with his own designs. He gathered only that the
young man was frivolous, unruly, of violent passions, impatient,
and dissipated, and that if he could only obtain ready money he
would be satisfied, although only, of course, for a short time. So
Fyodor Pavlovitch began to take advantage of this fact, sending
him from time to time small doles, installments. In the end, when
four years later, Mitya, losing patience, came a second time to our
little town to settle up once for all with his father, it turned out
to his amazement that he had nothing, that it was difficult to get
an account even, that he had received the whole value of his property
in sums of money from Fyodor Pavlovitch, and was perhaps even
in debt to him, that by various agreements into which he had, of
his own desire, entered at various previous dates, he had no right
to expect anything more, and so on, and so on. The young man
was overwhelmed, suspected deceit and cheating, and was almost
beside himself. And, indeed, this circumstance led to the catastrophe,
the account of which forms the subject of my first introductory
story, or rather the external side of it. But before I pass
to that story I must say a little of Fyodor Pavlovitch's other two
sons, and of their origin.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III. The Second Marriage And The Second Family</head>

<p>
Very shortly after getting his four-year-old Mitya off his hands
Fyodor Pavlovitch married a second time. His second marriage
lasted eight years. He took this second wife, Sofya Ivanovna, also
a very young girl, from another province, where he had gone upon
some small piece of business in company with a Jew. Though
Fyodor Pavlovitch was a drunkard and a vicious debauchee he
never neglected investing his capital, and managed his business
affairs very successfully, though, no doubt, not over-scrupulously.
Sofya Ivanovna was the daughter of an obscure deacon, and was
left from childhood an orphan without relations. She grew up
in the house of a general's widow, a wealthy old lady of good position,
<pb n='008'/><anchor id='Pg008'/>
who was at once her benefactress and tormentor. I do not
know the details, but I have only heard that the orphan girl, a
meek and gentle creature, was once cut down from a halter in
which she was hanging from a nail in the loft, so terrible were her
sufferings from the caprice and everlasting nagging of this old
woman, who was apparently not bad-hearted but had become an
insufferable tyrant through idleness.
</p>

<p>
Fyodor Pavlovitch made her an offer; inquiries were made about
him and he was refused. But again, as in his first marriage, he proposed
an elopement to the orphan girl. There is very little doubt
that she would not on any account have married him if she had
known a little more about him in time. But she lived in another
province; besides, what could a little girl of sixteen know about it,
except that she would be better at the bottom of the river than
remaining with her benefactress. So the poor child exchanged a
benefactress for a benefactor. Fyodor Pavlovitch did not get a
penny this time, for the general's widow was furious. She gave
them nothing and cursed them both. But he had not reckoned on
a dowry; what allured him was the remarkable beauty of the innocent
girl, above all her innocent appearance, which had a peculiar
attraction for a vicious profligate, who had hitherto admired only
the coarser types of feminine beauty.
</p>

<p>
<q>Those innocent eyes slit my soul up like a razor,</q> he used to say
afterwards, with his loathsome snigger. In a man so depraved this
might, of course, mean no more than sensual attraction. As he had
received no dowry with his wife, and had, so to speak, taken her
<q>from the halter,</q> he did not stand on ceremony with her. Making
her feel that she had <q>wronged</q> him, he took advantage of her
phenomenal meekness and submissiveness to trample on the elementary
decencies of marriage. He gathered loose women into his
house, and carried on orgies of debauchery in his wife's presence.
To show what a pass things had come to, I may mention that
Grigory, the gloomy, stupid, obstinate, argumentative servant, who
had always hated his first mistress, Adelaïda Ivanovna, took the
side of his new mistress. He championed her cause, abusing Fyodor
Pavlovitch in a manner little befitting a servant, and on one occasion
broke up the revels and drove all the disorderly women out of
the house. In the end this unhappy young woman, kept in terror
<pb n='009'/><anchor id='Pg009'/>
from her childhood, fell into that kind of nervous disease which is
most frequently found in peasant women who are said to be <q>possessed
by devils.</q> At times after terrible fits of hysterics she even
lost her reason. Yet she bore Fyodor Pavlovitch two sons, Ivan
and Alexey, the eldest in the first year of marriage and the second
three years later. When she died, little Alexey was in his fourth
year, and, strange as it seems, I know that he remembered his mother
all his life, like a dream, of course. At her death almost exactly the
same thing happened to the two little boys as to their elder brother,
Mitya. They were completely forgotten and abandoned by their
father. They were looked after by the same Grigory and lived in
his cottage, where they were found by the tyrannical old lady who
had brought up their mother. She was still alive, and had not, all
those eight years, forgotten the insult done her. All that time she
was obtaining exact information as to her Sofya's manner of life,
and hearing of her illness and hideous surroundings she declared
aloud two or three times to her retainers:
</p>

<p>
<q>It serves her right. God has punished her for her ingratitude.</q>
</p>

<p>
Exactly three months after Sofya Ivanovna's death the general's
widow suddenly appeared in our town, and went straight to Fyodor
Pavlovitch's house. She spent only half an hour in the town but she
did a great deal. It was evening. Fyodor Pavlovitch, whom she had
not seen for those eight years, came in to her drunk. The story is
that instantly upon seeing him, without any sort of explanation, she
gave him two good, resounding slaps on the face, seized him by a
tuft of hair, and shook him three times up and down. Then, without
a word, she went straight to the cottage to the two boys.
Seeing, at the first glance, that they were unwashed and in dirty
linen, she promptly gave Grigory, too, a box on the ear, and announcing
that she would carry off both the children she wrapped
them just as they were in a rug, put them in the carriage, and drove
off to her own town. Grigory accepted the blow like a devoted
slave, without a word, and when he escorted the old lady to her
carriage he made her a low bow and pronounced impressively that,
<q>God would repay her for the orphans.</q> <q>You are a blockhead all
the same,</q> the old lady shouted to him as she drove away.
</p>

<p>
Fyodor Pavlovitch, thinking it over, decided that it was a good
thing, and did not refuse the general's widow his formal consent to
<pb n='010'/><anchor id='Pg010'/>
any proposition in regard to his children's education. As for the
slaps she had given him, he drove all over the town telling the story.
</p>

<p>
It happened that the old lady died soon after this, but she left
the boys in her will a thousand roubles each <q>for their instruction,
and so that all be spent on them exclusively, with the condition
that it be so portioned out as to last till they are twenty-one, for it
is more than adequate provision for such children. If other people
think fit to throw away their money, let them.</q> I have not read
the will myself, but I heard there was something queer of the sort,
very whimsically expressed. The principal heir, Yefim Petrovitch
Polenov, the Marshal of Nobility of the province, turned out, however,
to be an honest man. Writing to Fyodor Pavlovitch, and
discerning at once that he could extract nothing from him for
his children's education (though the latter never directly refused
but only procrastinated as he always did in such cases, and was,
indeed, at times effusively sentimental), Yefim Petrovitch took a
personal interest in the orphans. He became especially fond of the
younger, Alexey, who lived for a long while as one of his family.
I beg the reader to note this from the beginning. And to Yefim
Petrovitch, a man of a generosity and humanity rarely to be met
with, the young people were more indebted for their education and
bringing up than to any one. He kept the two thousand roubles
left to them by the general's widow intact, so that by the time they
came of age their portions had been doubled by the accumulation
of interest. He educated them both at his own expense, and certainly
spent far more than a thousand roubles upon each of them.
I won't enter into a detailed account of their boyhood and youth,
but will only mention a few of the most important events. Of the
elder, Ivan, I will only say that he grew into a somewhat morose
and reserved, though far from timid boy. At ten years old he
had realized that they were living not in their own home but on
other people's charity, and that their father was a man of whom it
was disgraceful to speak. This boy began very early, almost in his
infancy (so they say at least), to show a brilliant and unusual aptitude
for learning. I don't know precisely why, but he left the
family of Yefim Petrovitch when he was hardly thirteen, entering
a Moscow gymnasium, and boarding with an experienced and celebrated
teacher, an old friend of Yefim Petrovitch. Ivan used to
<pb n='011'/><anchor id='Pg011'/>
declare afterwards that this was all due to the <q>ardor for good
works</q> of Yefim Petrovitch, who was captivated by the idea that
the boy's genius should be trained by a teacher of genius. But
neither Yefim Petrovitch nor this teacher was living when the young
man finished at the gymnasium and entered the university. As
Yefim Petrovitch had made no provision for the payment of the
tyrannical old lady's legacy, which had grown from one thousand to
two, it was delayed, owing to formalities inevitable in Russia, and
the young man was in great straits for the first two years at the
university, as he was forced to keep himself all the time he was
studying. It must be noted that he did not even attempt to communicate
with his father, perhaps from pride, from contempt for
him, or perhaps from his cool common sense, which told him that
from such a father he would get no real assistance. However that
may have been, the young man was by no means despondent and
succeeded in getting work, at first giving sixpenny lessons and
afterwards getting paragraphs on street incidents into the newspapers
under the signature of <q>Eye-Witness.</q> These paragraphs,
it was said, were so interesting and piquant that they were soon
taken. This alone showed the young man's practical and intellectual
superiority over the masses of needy and unfortunate students of
both sexes who hang about the offices of the newspapers and journals,
unable to think of anything better than everlasting entreaties for
copying and translations from the French. Having once got into
touch with the editors Ivan Fyodorovitch always kept up his connection
with them, and in his latter years at the university he published
brilliant reviews of books upon various special subjects, so
that he became well known in literary circles. But only in his
last year he suddenly succeeded in attracting the attention of a
far wider circle of readers, so that a great many people noticed and
remembered him. It was rather a curious incident. When he had
just left the university and was preparing to go abroad upon his two
thousand roubles, Ivan Fyodorovitch published in one of the more
important journals a strange article, which attracted general notice,
on a subject of which he might have been supposed to know nothing,
as he was a student of natural science. The article dealt with
a subject which was being debated everywhere at the time&mdash;the
position of the ecclesiastical courts. After discussing several opinions
<pb n='012'/><anchor id='Pg012'/>
on the subject he went on to explain his own view. What was
most striking about the article was its tone, and its unexpected
conclusion. Many of the Church party regarded him unquestioningly
as on their side. And yet not only the secularists but even
atheists joined them in their applause. Finally some sagacious persons
opined that the article was nothing but an impudent satirical
burlesque. I mention this incident particularly because this article
penetrated into the famous monastery in our neighborhood, where
the inmates, being particularly interested in the question of the
ecclesiastical courts, were completely bewildered by it. Learning
the author's name, they were interested in his being a native of
the town and the son of <q>that Fyodor Pavlovitch.</q> And just then
it was that the author himself made his appearance among us.
</p>

<p>
Why Ivan Fyodorovitch had come amongst us I remember asking
myself at the time with a certain uneasiness. This fateful visit,
which was the first step leading to so many consequences, I never
fully explained to myself. It seemed strange on the face of it that
a young man so learned, so proud, and apparently so cautious,
should suddenly visit such an infamous house and a father who had
ignored him all his life, hardly knew him, never thought of him,
and would not under any circumstances have given him money,
though he was always afraid that his sons Ivan and Alexey would
also come to ask him for it. And here the young man was staying
in the house of such a father, had been living with him for two
months, and they were on the best possible terms. This last fact
was a special cause of wonder to many others as well as to me.
Pyotr Alexandrovitch Miüsov, of whom we have spoken already,
the cousin of Fyodor Pavlovitch's first wife, happened to be in the
neighborhood again on a visit to his estate. He had come from
Paris, which was his permanent home. I remember that he was
more surprised than any one when he made the acquaintance of the
young man, who interested him extremely, and with whom he
sometimes argued and not without an inner pang compared himself
in acquirements.
</p>

<p>
<q>He is proud,</q> he used to say, <q>he will never be in want of pence;
he has got money enough to go abroad now. What does he want
here? Every one can see that he hasn't come for money, for his
father would never give him any. He has no taste for drink and
<pb n='013'/><anchor id='Pg013'/>
dissipation, and yet his father can't do without him. They get on
so well together!</q>
</p>

<p>
That was the truth; the young man had an unmistakable influence
over his father, who positively appeared to be behaving more decently
and even seemed at times ready to obey his son, though often
extremely and even spitefully perverse.
</p>

<p>
It was only later that we learned that Ivan had come partly at
the request of, and in the interests of, his elder brother, Dmitri,
whom he saw for the first time on this very visit, though he had
before leaving Moscow been in correspondence with him about an
important matter of more concern to Dmitri than himself. What
that business was the reader will learn fully in due time. Yet even
when I did know of this special circumstance I still felt Ivan
Fyodorovitch to be an enigmatic figure, and thought his visit rather
mysterious.
</p>

<p>
I may add that Ivan appeared at the time in the light of a
mediator between his father and his elder brother Dmitri, who was
in open quarrel with his father and even planning to bring an action
against him.
</p>

<p>
The family, I repeat, was now united for the first time, and some
of its members met for the first time in their lives. The younger
brother, Alexey, had been a year already among us, having been
the first of the three to arrive. It is of that brother Alexey I find
it most difficult to speak in this introduction. Yet I must give
some preliminary account of him, if only to explain one queer fact,
which is that I have to introduce my hero to the reader wearing
the cassock of a novice. Yes, he had been for the last year in our
monastery, and seemed willing to be cloistered there for the rest
of his life.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IV. The Third Son, Alyosha</head>

<p>
He was only twenty, his brother Ivan was in his twenty-fourth
year at the time, while their elder brother Dmitri was twenty-seven.
First of all, I must explain that this young man, Alyosha,
was not a fanatic, and, in my opinion at least, was not even a
<pb n='014'/><anchor id='Pg014'/>
mystic. I may as well give my full opinion from the beginning.
He was simply an early lover of humanity, and that he adopted the
monastic life was simply because at that time it struck him, so to
say, as the ideal escape for his soul struggling from the darkness of
worldly wickedness to the light of love. And the reason this life
struck him in this way was that he found in it at that time, as he
thought, an extraordinary being, our celebrated elder, Zossima, to
whom he became attached with all the warm first love of his ardent
heart. But I do not dispute that he was very strange even at that
time, and had been so indeed from his cradle. I have mentioned
already, by the way, that though he lost his mother in his fourth
year he remembered her all his life&mdash;her face, her caresses, <q>as though
she stood living before me.</q> Such memories may persist, as every
one knows, from an even earlier age, even from two years old, but
scarcely standing out through a whole lifetime like spots of light out
of darkness, like a corner torn out of a huge picture, which has all
faded and disappeared except that fragment. That is how it was
with him. He remembered one still summer evening, an open
window, the slanting rays of the setting sun (that he recalled most
vividly of all); in a corner of the room the holy image, before it a
lighted lamp, and on her knees before the image his mother, sobbing
hysterically with cries and moans, snatching him up in both arms,
squeezing him close till it hurt, and praying for him to the Mother
of God, holding him out in both arms to the image as though to put
him under the Mother's protection ... and suddenly a nurse runs
in and snatches him from her in terror. That was the picture!
And Alyosha remembered his mother's face at that minute. He used
to say that it was frenzied but beautiful as he remembered. But he
rarely cared to speak of this memory to any one. In his childhood
and youth he was by no means expansive, and talked little indeed,
but not from shyness or a sullen unsociability; quite the contrary,
from something different, from a sort of inner preoccupation entirely
personal and unconcerned with other people, but so important to
him that he seemed, as it were, to forget others on account of it.
But he was fond of people: he seemed throughout his life to put
implicit trust in people: yet no one ever looked on him as a simpleton
or naïve person. There was something about him which made
one feel at once (and it was so all his life afterwards) that he did
<pb n='015'/><anchor id='Pg015'/>
not care to be a judge of others&mdash;that he would never take it upon
himself to criticize and would never condemn any one for anything.
He seemed, indeed, to accept everything without the least condemnation
though often grieving bitterly: and this was so much
so that no one could surprise or frighten him even in his earliest
youth. Coming at twenty to his father's house, which was a very
sink of filthy debauchery, he, chaste and pure as he was, simply
withdrew in silence when to look on was unbearable, but without
the slightest sign of contempt or condemnation. His father, who
had once been in a dependent position, and so was sensitive and
ready to take offense, met him at first with distrust and sullenness.
<q>He does not say much,</q> he used to say, <q>and thinks the more.</q>
But soon, within a fortnight indeed, he took to embracing him and
kissing him terribly often, with drunken tears, with sottish sentimentality,
yet he evidently felt a real and deep affection for him,
such as he had never been capable of feeling for any one before.
</p>

<p>
Every one, indeed, loved this young man wherever he went, and
it was so from his earliest childhood. When he entered the household
of his patron and benefactor, Yefim Petrovitch Polenov, he
gained the hearts of all the family, so that they looked on him quite
as their own child. Yet he entered the house at such a tender age
that he could not have acted from design nor artfulness in winning
affection. So that the gift of making himself loved directly and
unconsciously was inherent in him, in his very nature, so to speak.
It was the same at school, though he seemed to be just one of those
children who are distrusted, sometimes ridiculed, and even disliked
by their schoolfellows. He was dreamy, for instance, and rather
solitary. From his earliest childhood he was fond of creeping into a
corner to read, and yet he was a general favorite all the while he was
at school. He was rarely playful or merry, but any one could see
at the first glance that this was not from any sullenness. On the
contrary he was bright and good-tempered. He never tried to show
off among his schoolfellows. Perhaps because of this, he was never
afraid of any one, yet the boys immediately understood that he was
not proud of his fearlessness and seemed to be unaware that he was
bold and courageous. He never resented an insult. It would happen
that an hour after the offense he would address the offender or
answer some question with as trustful and candid an expression as
<pb n='016'/><anchor id='Pg016'/>
though nothing had happened between them. And it was not that
he seemed to have forgotten or intentionally forgiven the affront,
but simply that he did not regard it as an affront, and this completely
conquered and captivated the boys. He had one characteristic
which made all his schoolfellows from the bottom class to the
top want to mock at him, not from malice but because it amused
them. This characteristic was a wild fanatical modesty and chastity.
He could not bear to hear certain words and certain conversations
about women. There are <q>certain</q> words and conversations unhappily
impossible to eradicate in schools. Boys pure in mind and
heart, almost children, are fond of talking in school among themselves,
and even aloud, of things, pictures, and images of which even
soldiers would sometimes hesitate to speak. More than that, much
that soldiers have no knowledge or conception of is familiar to quite
young children of our intellectual and higher classes. There is no
moral depravity, no real corrupt inner cynicism in it, but there is
the appearance of it, and it is often looked upon among them as
something refined, subtle, daring, and worthy of imitation. Seeing
that Alyosha Karamazov put his fingers in his ears when they talked
of <q>that,</q> they used sometimes to crowd round him, pull his hands
away, and shout nastiness into both ears, while he struggled, slipped
to the floor, tried to hide himself without uttering one word of
abuse, enduring their insults in silence. But at last they left him
alone and gave up taunting him with being a <q>regular girl,</q> and
what's more they looked upon it with compassion as a weakness.
He was always one of the best in the class but was never first.
</p>

<p>
At the time of Yefim Petrovitch's death Alyosha had two more
years to complete at the provincial gymnasium. The inconsolable
widow went almost immediately after his death for a long visit to
Italy with her whole family, which consisted only of women and
girls. Alyosha went to live in the house of two distant relations of
Yefim Petrovitch, ladies whom he had never seen before. On what
terms he lived with them he did not know himself. It was very
characteristic of him, indeed, that he never cared at whose expense
he was living. In that respect he was a striking contrast to his
elder brother Ivan, who struggled with poverty for his first two
years in the university, maintained himself by his own efforts, and
had from childhood been bitterly conscious of living at the expense
<pb n='017'/><anchor id='Pg017'/>
of his benefactor. But this strange trait in Alyosha's character
must not, I think, be criticized too severely, for at the slightest acquaintance
with him any one would have perceived that Alyosha
was one of those youths, almost of the type of religious enthusiast,
who, if they were suddenly to come into possession of a large fortune,
would not hesitate to give it away for the asking, either for
good works or perhaps to a clever rogue. In general he seemed
scarcely to know the value of money, not, of course, in a literal
sense. When he was given pocket-money, which he never asked for,
he was either terribly careless of it so that it was gone in a moment,
or he kept it for weeks together, not knowing what to do with it.
</p>

<p>
In later years Pyotr Alexandrovitch Miüsov, a man very sensitive
on the score of money and bourgeois honesty, pronounced the following
judgment, after getting to know Alyosha:
</p>

<p>
<q>Here is perhaps the one man in the world whom you might
leave alone without a penny, in the center of an unknown town of
a million inhabitants, and he would not come to harm, he would not
die of cold and hunger, for he would be fed and sheltered at once;
and if he were not, he would find a shelter for himself, and it would
cost him no effort or humiliation. And to shelter him would be no
burden, but, on the contrary, would probably be looked on as a
pleasure.</q>
</p>

<p>
He did not finish his studies at the gymnasium. A year before
the end of the course he suddenly announced to the ladies that he
was going to see his father about a plan which had occurred to him.
They were sorry and unwilling to let him go. The journey was
not an expensive one, and the ladies would not let him pawn his
watch, a parting present from his benefactor's family. They provided
him liberally with money and even fitted him out with new
clothes and linen. But he returned half the money they gave him,
saying that he intended to go third class. On his arrival in the town
he made no answer to his father's first inquiry why he had come
before completing his studies, and seemed, so they say, unusually
thoughtful. It soon became apparent that he was looking for his
mother's tomb. He practically acknowledged at the time that that
was the only object of his visit. But it can hardly have been the
whole reason of it. It is more probable that he himself did not
understand and could not explain what had suddenly arisen in his
<pb n='018'/><anchor id='Pg018'/>
soul, and drawn him irresistibly into a new, unknown, but inevitable
path. Fyodor Pavlovitch could not show him where his second
wife was buried, for he had never visited her grave since he had
thrown earth upon her coffin, and in the course of years had entirely
forgotten where she was buried.
</p>

<p>
Fyodor Pavlovitch, by the way, had for some time previously not
been living in our town. Three or four years after his wife's death
he had gone to the south of Russia and finally turned up in Odessa,
where he spent several years. He made the acquaintance at first,
in his own words, <q>of a lot of low Jews, Jewesses, and Jewkins,</q>
and ended by being received by <q>Jews high and low alike.</q> It may
be presumed that at this period he developed a peculiar faculty for
making and hoarding money. He finally returned to our town only
three years before Alyosha's arrival. His former acquaintances
found him looking terribly aged, although he was by no means an
old man. He behaved not exactly with more dignity but with
more effrontery. The former buffoon showed an insolent propensity
for making buffoons of others. His depravity with women was
not simply what it used to be, but even more revolting. In a short
time he opened a great number of new taverns in the district. It
was evident that he had perhaps a hundred thousand roubles or not
much less. Many of the inhabitants of the town and district were
soon in his debt, and, of course, had given good security. Of late,
too, he looked somehow bloated and seemed more irresponsible, more
uneven, had sunk into a sort of incoherence, used to begin one thing
and go on with another, as though he were letting himself go altogether.
He was more and more frequently drunk. And, if it had
not been for the same servant Grigory, who by that time had aged
considerably too, and used to look after him sometimes almost like
a tutor, Fyodor Pavlovitch might have got into terrible scrapes.
Alyosha's arrival seemed to affect even his moral side, as though
something had awakened in this prematurely old man which had
long been dead in his soul.
</p>

<p>
<q>Do you know,</q> he used often to say, looking at Alyosha, <q>that
you are like her, <q>the crazy woman</q></q>&mdash;that was what he used to call
his dead wife, Alyosha's mother. Grigory it was who pointed out
the <q>crazy woman's</q> grave to Alyosha. He took him to our town
cemetery and showed him in a remote corner a cast-iron tombstone,
<pb n='019'/><anchor id='Pg019'/>
cheap but decently kept, on which were inscribed the name and
age of the deceased and the date of her death, and below a four-lined
verse, such as are commonly used on old-fashioned middle-class
tombs. To Alyosha's amazement this tomb turned out to be
Grigory's doing. He had put it up on the poor <q>crazy woman's</q>
grave at his own expense, after Fyodor Pavlovitch, whom he had
often pestered about the grave, had gone to Odessa, abandoning the
grave and all his memories. Alyosha showed no particular emotion
at the sight of his mother's grave. He only listened to Grigory's
minute and solemn account of the erection of the tomb; he stood
with bowed head and walked away without uttering a word. It was
perhaps a year before he visited the cemetery again. But this little
episode was not without an influence upon Fyodor Pavlovitch&mdash;and
a very original one. He suddenly took a thousand roubles to our
monastery to pay for requiems for the soul of his wife; but not for
the second, Alyosha's mother, the <q>crazy woman,</q> but for the
first, Adelaïda Ivanovna, who used to thrash him. In the evening
of the same day he got drunk and abused the monks to Alyosha.
He himself was far from being religious; he had probably never
put a penny candle before the image of a saint. Strange impulses
of sudden feeling and sudden thought are common in such types.
</p>

<p>
I have mentioned already that he looked bloated. His countenance
at this time bore traces of something that testified unmistakably
to the life he had led. Besides the long fleshy bags under his
little, always insolent, suspicious, and ironical eyes; besides the multitude
of deep wrinkles in his little fat face, the Adam's apple hung
below his sharp chin like a great, fleshy goiter, which gave him a
peculiar, repulsive, sensual appearance; add to that a long rapacious
mouth with full lips, between which could be seen little stumps of
black decayed teeth. He slobbered every time he began to speak.
He was fond indeed of making fun of his own face, though, I believe,
he was well satisfied with it. He used particularly to point to
his nose, which was not very large, but very delicate and conspicuously
aquiline. <q>A regular Roman nose,</q> he used to say, <q>with my
goiter I've quite the countenance of an ancient Roman patrician of
the decadent period.</q> He seemed proud of it.
</p>

<p>
Not long after visiting his mother's grave Alyosha suddenly announced
that he wanted to enter the monastery, and that the monks
<pb n='020'/><anchor id='Pg020'/>
were willing to receive him as a novice. He explained that this was
his strong desire, and that he was solemnly asking his consent as his
father. The old man knew that the elder Zossima, who was living
in the monastery hermitage, had made a special impression upon
his <q>gentle boy.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>That is the most honest monk among them, of course,</q> he observed,
after listening in thoughtful silence to Alyosha, and seeming
scarcely surprised at his request. <q>H'm!... So that's where you
want to be, my gentle boy?</q>
</p>

<p>
He was half drunk, and suddenly he grinned his slow half-drunken
grin, which was not without a certain cunning and tipsy
slyness. <q>H'm!... I had a presentiment that you would end in
something like this. Would you believe it? You were making
straight for it. Well, to be sure you have your own two thousand.
That's a dowry for you. And I'll never desert you, my angel. And
I'll pay what's wanted for you there, if they ask for it. But, of
course, if they don't ask, why should we worry them? What do you
say? You know, you spend money like a canary, two grains a week.
H'm!... Do you know that near one monastery there's a place
outside the town where every baby knows there are none but <q>the
monks' wives</q> living, as they are called. Thirty women, I believe.
I have been there myself. You know, it's interesting in its own
way, of course, as a variety. The worst of it is it's awfully Russian.
There are no French women there. Of course they could get them
fast enough, they have plenty of money. If they get to hear of it
they'll come along. Well, there's nothing of that sort here, no
<q>monks' wives,</q> and two hundred monks. They're honest. They
keep the fasts. I admit it.... H'm.... So you want to be a
monk? And do you know I'm sorry to lose you, Alyosha; would
you believe it, I've really grown fond of you? Well, it's a good
opportunity. You'll pray for us sinners; we have sinned too much
here. I've always been thinking who would pray for me, and
whether there's any one in the world to do it. My dear boy, I'm
awfully stupid about that. You wouldn't believe it. Awfully.
You see, however stupid I am about it, I keep thinking, I keep
thinking&mdash;from time to time, of course, not all the while. It's
impossible, I think, for the devils to forget to drag me down to hell
with their hooks when I die. Then I wonder&mdash;hooks? Where would
<pb n='021'/><anchor id='Pg021'/>
they get them? What of? Iron hooks? Where do they forge
them? Have they a foundry there of some sort? The monks in
the monastery probably believe that there's a ceiling in hell, for instance.
Now I'm ready to believe in hell, but without a ceiling.
It makes it more refined, more enlightened, more Lutheran that is.
And, after all, what does it matter whether it has a ceiling or hasn't?
But, do you know, there's a damnable question involved in it? If
there's no ceiling there can be no hooks, and if there are no hooks
it all breaks down, which is unlikely again, for then there would be
none to drag me down to hell, and if they don't drag me down what
justice is there in the world? <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Il faudrait les
inventer</foreign>, those hooks,
on purpose for me alone, for, if you only knew, Alyosha, what a
blackguard I am.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But there are no hooks there,</q> said Alyosha, looking gently and
seriously at his father.
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, yes, only the shadows of hooks, I know, I know. That's
how a Frenchman described hell: <q><foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>J'ai bu l'ombre d'un
cocher qui avec l'ombre d'une brosse frottait l'ombre d'une carrosse.</foreign></q> How do
you know there are no hooks, darling? When you've lived with
the monks you'll sing a different tune. But go and get at the truth
there, and then come and tell me. Anyway it's easier going to the
other world if one knows what there is there. Besides, it will be
more seemly for you with the monks than here with me, with a
drunken old man and young harlots ... though you're like an
angel, nothing touches you. And I dare say nothing will touch
you there. That's why I let you go, because I hope for that.
You've got all your wits about you. You will burn and you will
burn out; you will be healed and come back again. And I will wait
for you. I feel that you're the only creature in the world who has
not condemned me. My dear boy, I feel it, you know. I can't help
feeling it.</q>
</p>

<p>
And he even began blubbering. He was sentimental. He was
wicked and sentimental.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='022'/><anchor id='Pg022'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter V. Elders</head>

<p>
Some of my readers may imagine that my young man was a
sickly, ecstatic, poorly developed creature, a pale, consumptive
dreamer. On the contrary, Alyosha was at this time a well-grown,
red-cheeked, clear-eyed lad of nineteen, radiant with health. He
was very handsome, too, graceful, moderately tall, with hair of a
dark brown, with a regular, rather long, oval-shaped face, and wide-set
dark gray, shining eyes; he was very thoughtful, and apparently
very serene. I shall be told, perhaps, that red cheeks are not incompatible
with fanaticism and mysticism; but I fancy that Alyosha
was more of a realist than any one. Oh! no doubt, in the monastery
he fully believed in miracles, but, to my thinking, miracles are never
a stumbling-block to the realist. It is not miracles that dispose
realists to belief. The genuine realist, if he is an unbeliever, will
always find strength and ability to disbelieve in the miraculous, and
if he is confronted with a miracle as an irrefutable fact he would
rather disbelieve his own senses than admit the fact. Even if he
admits it, he admits it as a fact of nature till then unrecognized by
him. Faith does not, in the realist, spring from the miracle but the
miracle from faith. If the realist once believes, then he is bound
by his very realism to admit the miraculous also. The Apostle
Thomas said that he would not believe till he saw, but when he did
see he said, <q>My Lord and my God!</q> Was it the miracle forced
him to believe? Most likely not, but he believed solely because he
desired to believe and possibly he fully believed in his secret heart
even when he said, <q>I do not believe till I see.</q>
</p>

<p>
I shall be told, perhaps, that Alyosha was stupid, undeveloped, had
not finished his studies, and so on. That he did not finish his studies
is true, but to say that he was stupid or dull would be a great injustice.
I'll simply repeat what I have said above. He entered upon
this path only because, at that time, it alone struck his imagination
and presented itself to him as offering an ideal means of escape for
his soul from darkness to light. Add to that that he was to some
extent a youth of our last epoch&mdash;that is, honest in nature, desiring
<pb n='023'/><anchor id='Pg023'/>
the truth, seeking for it and believing in it, and seeking to serve it at
once with all the strength of his soul, seeking for immediate action,
and ready to sacrifice everything, life itself, for it. Though these
young men unhappily fail to understand that the sacrifice of life is,
in many cases, the easiest of all sacrifices, and that to sacrifice, for
instance, five or six years of their seething youth to hard and tedious
study, if only to multiply tenfold their powers of serving the truth
and the cause they have set before them as their goal&mdash;such a sacrifice
is utterly beyond the strength of many of them. The path
Alyosha chose was a path going in the opposite direction, but he
chose it with the same thirst for swift achievement. As soon as he
reflected seriously he was convinced of the existence of God and
immortality, and at once he instinctively said to himself: <q>I want
to live for immortality, and I will accept no compromise.</q> In the
same way, if he had decided that God and immortality did not exist,
he would at once have become an atheist and a socialist. For socialism
is not merely the labor question, it is before all things the atheistic
question, the question of the form taken by atheism to-day, the
question of the tower of Babel built without God, not to mount
to heaven from earth but to set up heaven on earth. Alyosha would
have found it strange and impossible to go on living as before. It
is written: <q>Give all that thou hast to the poor and follow Me, if
thou wouldst be perfect.</q>
</p>

<p>
Alyosha said to himself: <q>I can't give two roubles instead of
<q>all,</q> and only go to mass instead of <q>following Him.</q></q> Perhaps his
memories of childhood brought back our monastery, to which his
mother may have taken him to mass. Perhaps the slanting sunlight
and the holy image to which his poor <q>crazy</q> mother had held him
up still acted upon his imagination. Brooding on these things he may
have come to us perhaps only to see whether here he could sacrifice
all or only <q>two roubles,</q> and in the monastery he met this elder.
I must digress to explain what an <q>elder</q> is in Russian monasteries,
and I am sorry that I do not feel very competent to do so. I will
try, however, to give a superficial account of it in a few words.
Authorities on the subject assert that the institution of <q>elders</q> is
of recent date, not more than a hundred years old in our monasteries,
though in the orthodox East, especially in Sinai and Athos, it has
existed over a thousand years. It is maintained that it existed in
<pb n='024'/><anchor id='Pg024'/>
ancient times in Russia also, but through the calamities which overtook
Russia&mdash;the Tartars, civil war, the interruption of relations
with the East after the destruction of Constantinople&mdash;this institution
fell into oblivion. It was revived among us towards the end
of last century by one of the great <q>ascetics,</q> as they called him,
Païssy Velitchkovsky, and his disciples. But to this day it exists in
few monasteries only, and has sometimes been almost persecuted as
an innovation in Russia. It flourished especially in the celebrated
Kozelski Optin Monastery. When and how it was introduced into
our monastery I cannot say. There had already been three such
elders and Zossima was the last of them. But he was almost dying
of weakness and disease, and they had no one to take his place. The
question for our monastery was an important one, for it had not
been distinguished by anything in particular till then: they had
neither relics of saints, nor wonder-working ikons, nor glorious
traditions, nor historical exploits. It had flourished and been glorious
all over Russia through its elders, to see and hear whom pilgrims had
flocked for thousands of miles from all parts.
</p>

<p>
What was such an elder? An elder was one who took your soul,
your will, into his soul and his will. When you choose an elder,
you renounce your own will and yield it to him in complete submission,
complete self-abnegation. This novitiate, this terrible
school of abnegation, is undertaken voluntarily, in the hope of self-conquest,
of self-mastery, in order, after a life of obedience, to
attain perfect freedom, that is, from self; to escape the lot of those
who have lived their whole life without finding their true selves
in themselves. This institution of elders is not founded on theory,
but was established in the East from the practice of a thousand
years. The obligations due to an elder are not the ordinary <q>obedience</q>
which has always existed in our Russian monasteries. The
obligation involves confession to the elder by all who have submitted
themselves to him, and to the indissoluble bond between him
and them.
</p>

<p>
The story is told, for instance, that in the early days of Christianity
one such novice, failing to fulfill some command laid upon
him by his elder, left his monastery in Syria and went to Egypt.
There, after great exploits, he was found worthy at last to suffer
torture and a martyr's death for the faith. When the Church, regarding
<pb n='025'/><anchor id='Pg025'/>
him as a saint, was burying him, suddenly, at the deacon's
exhortation, <q>Depart all ye unbaptized,</q> the coffin containing the
martyr's body left its place and was cast forth from the church,
and this took place three times. And only at last they learnt that
this holy man had broken his vow of obedience and left his elder,
and, therefore, could not be forgiven without the elder's absolution
in spite of his great deeds. Only after this could the funeral take
place. This, of course, is only an old legend. But here is a recent
instance.
</p>

<p>
A monk was suddenly commanded by his elder to quit Athos,
which he loved as a sacred place and a haven of refuge, and to go
first to Jerusalem to do homage to the Holy Places and then to go
to the north to Siberia: <q>There is the place for thee and not here.</q>
The monk, overwhelmed with sorrow, went to the Œcumenical
Patriarch at Constantinople and besought him to release him from
his obedience. But the Patriarch replied that not only was he unable
to release him, but there was not and could not be on earth a power
which could release him except the elder who had himself laid that
duty upon him. In this way the elders are endowed in certain cases
with unbounded and inexplicable authority. That is why in many
of our monasteries the institution was at first resisted almost to
persecution. Meantime the elders immediately began to be highly
esteemed among the people. Masses of the ignorant people as well
as men of distinction flocked, for instance, to the elders of our
monastery to confess their doubts, their sins, and their sufferings,
and ask for counsel and admonition. Seeing this, the opponents of
the elders declared that the sacrament of confession was being
arbitrarily and frivolously degraded, though the continual opening
of the heart to the elder by the monk or the layman had nothing
of the character of the sacrament. In the end, however, the institution
of elders has been retained and is becoming established in
Russian monasteries. It is true, perhaps, that this instrument which
had stood the test of a thousand years for the moral regeneration
of a man from slavery to freedom and to moral perfectibility may
be a two-edged weapon and it may lead some not to humility and
complete self-control but to the most Satanic pride, that is, to
bondage and not to freedom.
</p>

<p>
The elder Zossima was sixty-five. He came of a family of landowners,
<pb n='026'/><anchor id='Pg026'/>
had been in the army in early youth, and served in the
Caucasus as an officer. He had, no doubt, impressed Alyosha by
some peculiar quality of his soul. Alyosha lived in the cell of the
elder, who was very fond of him and let him wait upon him. It
must be noted that Alyosha was bound by no obligation and could
go where he pleased and be absent for whole days. Though he wore
the monastic dress it was voluntarily, not to be different from others.
No doubt he liked to do so. Possibly his youthful imagination was
deeply stirred by the power and fame of his elder. It was said that
so many people had for years past come to confess their sins to
Father Zossima and to entreat him for words of advice and healing,
that he had acquired the keenest intuition and could tell from an
unknown face what a new-comer wanted, and what was the suffering
on his conscience. He sometimes astounded and almost alarmed
his visitors by his knowledge of their secrets before they had spoken
a word.
</p>

<p>
Alyosha noticed that many, almost all, went in to the elder for
the first time with apprehension and uneasiness, but came out with
bright and happy faces. Alyosha was particularly struck by the
fact that Father Zossima was not at all stern. On the contrary, he
was always almost gay. The monks used to say that he was more
drawn to those who were more sinful, and the greater the sinner
the more he loved him. There were, no doubt, up to the end of
his life, among the monks some who hated and envied him, but they
were few in number and they were silent, though among them were
some of great dignity in the monastery, one, for instance, of the
older monks distinguished for his strict keeping of fasts and vows
of silence. But the majority were on Father Zossima's side and very
many of them loved him with all their hearts, warmly and sincerely.
Some were almost fanatically devoted to him, and declared, though
not quite aloud, that he was a saint, that there could be no doubt
of it, and, seeing that his end was near, they anticipated miracles and
great glory to the monastery in the immediate future from his relics.
Alyosha had unquestioning faith in the miraculous power of the
elder, just as he had unquestioning faith in the story of the coffin
that flew out of the church. He saw many who came with sick
children or relatives and besought the elder to lay hands on them
<pb n='027'/><anchor id='Pg027'/>
and to pray over them, return shortly after&mdash;some the next day&mdash;and,
falling in tears at the elder's feet, thank him for healing their
sick.
</p>

<p>
Whether they had really been healed or were simply better in the
natural course of the disease was a question which did not exist for
Alyosha, for he fully believed in the spiritual power of his teacher
and rejoiced in his fame, in his glory, as though it were his own
triumph. His heart throbbed, and he beamed, as it were, all over
when the elder came out to the gates of the hermitage into the waiting
crowd of pilgrims of the humbler class who had flocked from
all parts of Russia on purpose to see the elder and obtain his blessing.
They fell down before him, wept, kissed his feet, kissed the earth
on which he stood, and wailed, while the women held up their children
to him and brought him the sick <q>possessed with devils.</q>
The elder spoke to them, read a brief prayer over them, blessed them,
and dismissed them. Of late he had become so weak through attacks
of illness that he was sometimes unable to leave his cell, and
the pilgrims waited for him to come out for several days. Alyosha
did not wonder why they loved him so, why they fell down before
him and wept with emotion merely at seeing his face. Oh! he
understood that for the humble soul of the Russian peasant, worn
out by grief and toil, and still more by the everlasting injustice and
everlasting sin, his own and the world's, it was the greatest need
and comfort to find some one or something holy to fall down before
and worship.
</p>

<p>
<q>Among us there is sin, injustice, and temptation, but yet, somewhere
on earth there is some one holy and exalted. He has the
truth; he knows the truth; so it is not dead upon the earth; so it
will come one day to us, too, and rule over all the earth according to
the promise.</q>
</p>

<p>
Alyosha knew that this was just how the people felt and even
reasoned. He understood it, but that the elder Zossima was this
saint and custodian of God's truth&mdash;of that he had no more doubt
than the weeping peasants and the sick women who held out their
children to the elder. The conviction that after his death the elder
would bring extraordinary glory to the monastery was even stronger
in Alyosha than in any one there, and, of late, a kind of deep flame
<pb n='028'/><anchor id='Pg028'/>
of inner ecstasy burnt more and more strongly in his heart. He
was not at all troubled at this elder's standing as a solitary example
before him.
</p>

<p>
<q>No matter. He is holy. He carries in his heart the secret of
renewal for all: that power which will, at last, establish truth on
the earth, and all men will be holy and love one another, and there
will be no more rich nor poor, no exalted nor humbled, but all will
be as the children of God, and the true Kingdom of Christ will
come.</q> That was the dream in Alyosha's heart.
</p>

<p>
The arrival of his two brothers, whom he had not known till
then, seemed to make a great impression on Alyosha. He more
quickly made friends with his half-brother Dmitri (though he arrived
later) than with his own brother Ivan. He was extremely
interested in his brother Ivan, but when the latter had been two
months in the town, though they had met fairly often, they were
still not intimate. Alyosha was naturally silent, and he seemed to be
expecting something, ashamed about something, while his brother
Ivan, though Alyosha noticed at first that he looked long and
curiously at him, seemed soon to have left off thinking of him.
Alyosha noticed it with some embarrassment. He ascribed his
brother's indifference at first to the disparity of their age and education.
But he also wondered whether the absence of curiosity and
sympathy in Ivan might be due to some other cause entirely unknown
to him. He kept fancying that Ivan was absorbed in something&mdash;something
inward and important&mdash;that he was striving
towards some goal, perhaps very hard to attain, and that that was
why he had no thought for him. Alyosha wondered, too, whether
there was not some contempt on the part of the learned atheist for
him&mdash;a foolish novice. He knew for certain that his brother was
an atheist. He could not take offense at this contempt, if it existed;
yet, with an uneasy embarrassment which he did not himself understand,
he waited for his brother to come nearer to him. Dmitri used
to speak of Ivan with the deepest respect and with a peculiar
earnestness. From him Alyosha learnt all the details of the important
affair which had of late formed such a close and remarkable
bond between the two elder brothers. Dmitri's enthusiastic references
to Ivan were the more striking in Alyosha's eyes since Dmitri
was, compared with Ivan, almost uneducated, and the two brothers
<pb n='029'/><anchor id='Pg029'/>
were such a contrast in personality and character that it would be
difficult to find two men more unlike.
</p>

<p>
It was at this time that the meeting, or, rather gathering of the
members of this inharmonious family took place in the cell of the
elder who had such an extraordinary influence on Alyosha. The
pretext for this gathering was a false one. It was at this time that
the discord between Dmitri and his father seemed at its acutest
stage and their relations had become insufferably strained. Fyodor
Pavlovitch seems to have been the first to suggest, apparently in
joke, that they should all meet in Father Zossima's cell, and that,
without appealing to his direct intervention, they might more
decently come to an understanding under the conciliating influence
of the elder's presence. Dmitri, who had never seen the elder,
naturally supposed that his father was trying to intimidate him, but,
as he secretly blamed himself for his outbursts of temper with his
father on several recent occasions, he accepted the challenge. It
must be noted that he was not, like Ivan, staying with his father,
but living apart at the other end of the town. It happened that
Pyotr Alexandrovitch Miüsov, who was staying in the district at
the time, caught eagerly at the idea. A Liberal of the forties and fifties,
a freethinker and atheist, he may have been led on by boredom
or the hope of frivolous diversion. He was suddenly seized with the
desire to see the monastery and the holy man. As his lawsuit with
the monastery still dragged on, he made it the pretext for seeing
the Superior, in order to attempt to settle it amicably. A visitor
coming with such laudable intentions might be received with more
attention and consideration than if he came from simple curiosity.
Influences from within the monastery were brought to bear on the
elder, who of late had scarcely left his cell, and had been forced
by illness to deny even his ordinary visitors. In the end he consented
to see them, and the day was fixed.
</p>

<p>
<q>Who has made me a judge over them?</q> was all he said, smilingly,
to Alyosha.
</p>

<p>
Alyosha was much perturbed when he heard of the proposed visit.
Of all the wrangling, quarrelsome party, Dmitri was the only one
who could regard the interview seriously. All the others would
come from frivolous motives, perhaps insulting to the elder.
Alyosha was well aware of that. Ivan and Miüsov would come from
<pb n='030'/><anchor id='Pg030'/>
curiosity, perhaps of the coarsest kind, while his father might be
contemplating some piece of buffoonery. Though he said nothing,
Alyosha thoroughly understood his father. The boy, I repeat, was
far from being so simple as every one thought him. He awaited the
day with a heavy heart. No doubt he was always pondering in his
mind how the family discord could be ended. But his chief anxiety
concerned the elder. He trembled for him, for his glory, and
dreaded any affront to him, especially the refined, courteous irony of
Miüsov and the supercilious half-utterances of the highly educated
Ivan. He even wanted to venture on warning the elder, telling him
something about them, but, on second thoughts, said nothing. He
only sent word the day before, through a friend, to his brother
Dmitri, that he loved him and expected him to keep his promise.
Dmitri wondered, for he could not remember what he had promised,
but he answered by letter that he would do his utmost not to let
himself be provoked <q>by vileness,</q> but that, although he had a deep
respect for the elder and for his brother Ivan, he was convinced that
the meeting was either a trap for him or an unworthy farce.
</p>

<p>
<q>Nevertheless I would rather bite out my tongue than be lacking
in respect to the sainted man whom you reverence so highly,</q> he
wrote in conclusion. Alyosha was not greatly cheered by the letter.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='031'/><anchor id='Pg031'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Book II. An Unfortunate Gathering</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I. They Arrive At The Monastery</head>

<p>
It was a warm, bright day at the end of August. The interview
with the elder had been fixed for half-past eleven, immediately
after late mass. Our visitors did not take part in the service, but
arrived just as it was over. First an elegant open carriage, drawn
by two valuable horses, drove up with Miüsov and a distant relative
of his, a young man of twenty, called Pyotr Fomitch Kalganov.
This young man was preparing to enter the university. Miüsov,
with whom he was staying for the time, was trying to persuade him
to go abroad to the university of Zurich or Jena. The young man
was still undecided. He was thoughtful and absent-minded. He
was nice-looking, strongly built, and rather tall. There was a strange
fixity in his gaze at times. Like all very absent-minded people he
would sometimes stare at a person without seeing him. He was
silent and rather awkward, but sometimes, when he was alone with
any one, he became talkative and effusive, and would laugh at anything
or nothing. But his animation vanished as quickly as it appeared.
He was always well and even elaborately dressed; he had
already some independent fortune and expectations of much more.
He was a friend of Alyosha's.
</p>

<p>
In an ancient, jolting, but roomy, hired carriage, with a pair of
old pinkish-gray horses, a long way behind Miüsov's carriage, came
Fyodor Pavlovitch, with his son Ivan. Dmitri was late, though
he had been informed of the time the evening before. The visitors
left their carriage at the hotel, outside the precincts, and went to
the gates of the monastery on foot. Except Fyodor Pavlovitch,
none of the party had ever seen the monastery, and Miüsov had
probably not even been to church for thirty years. He looked
<pb n='032'/><anchor id='Pg032'/>
about him with curiosity, together with assumed ease. But, except
the church and the domestic buildings, though these too were ordinary
enough, he found nothing of interest in the interior of the
monastery. The last of the worshippers were coming out of the
church, bareheaded and crossing themselves. Among the humbler
people were a few of higher rank&mdash;two or three ladies and a very
old general. They were all staying at the hotel. Our visitors were
at once surrounded by beggars, but none of them gave them anything,
except young Kalganov, who took a ten-copeck piece out of
his purse, and, nervous and embarrassed&mdash;God knows why!&mdash;hurriedly
gave it to an old woman, saying: <q>Divide it equally.</q> None
of his companions made any remark upon it, so that he had no
reason to be embarrassed; but, perceiving this, he was even more
overcome.
</p>

<p>
It was strange that their arrival did not seem expected, and that
they were not received with special honor, though one of them had
recently made a donation of a thousand roubles, while another was
a very wealthy and highly cultured landowner, upon whom all in
the monastery were in a sense dependent, as a decision of the lawsuit
might at any moment put their fishing rights in his hands.
Yet no official personage met them.
</p>

<p>
Miüsov looked absent-mindedly at the tombstones round the
church, and was on the point of saying that the dead buried here
must have paid a pretty penny for the right of lying in this <q>holy
place,</q> but refrained. His liberal irony was rapidly changing almost
into anger.
</p>

<p>
<q>Who the devil is there to ask in this imbecile place? We must
find out, for time is passing,</q> he observed suddenly, as though
speaking to himself.
</p>

<p>
All at once there came up a bald-headed, elderly man with ingratiating
little eyes, wearing a full, summer overcoat. Lifting
his hat, he introduced himself with a honeyed lisp as Maximov, a
landowner of Tula. He at once entered into our visitors' difficulty.
</p>

<p>
<q>Father Zossima lives in the hermitage, apart, four hundred paces
from the monastery, the other side of the copse.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I know it's the other side of the copse,</q> observed Fyodor Pavlovitch,
<q>but we don't remember the way. It is a long time since
we've been here.</q>
</p>

<pb n='033'/><anchor id='Pg033'/>

<p>
<q>This way, by this gate, and straight across the copse ... the
copse. Come with me, won't you? I'll show you. I have to go....
I am going myself. This way, this way.</q>
</p>

<p>
They came out of the gate and turned towards the copse. Maximov,
a man of sixty, ran rather than walked, turning sideways to
stare at them all, with an incredible degree of nervous curiosity.
His eyes looked starting out of his head.
</p>

<p>
<q>You see, we have come to the elder upon business of our own,</q>
observed Miüsov severely. <q>That personage has granted us an audience,
so to speak, and so, though we thank you for showing us the
way, we cannot ask you to accompany us.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I've been there. I've been already; <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>un
chevalier parfait</foreign>,</q> and
Maximov snapped his fingers in the air.
</p>

<p>
<q>Who is a <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>chevalier</foreign>?</q> asked Miüsov.
</p>

<p>
<q>The elder, the splendid elder, the elder! The honor and glory
of the monastery, Zossima. Such an elder!</q>
</p>

<p>
But his incoherent talk was cut short by a very pale, wan-looking
monk of medium height, wearing a monk's cap, who overtook them.
Fyodor Pavlovitch and Miüsov stopped.
</p>

<p>
The monk, with an extremely courteous, profound bow, announced:
</p>

<p>
<q>The Father Superior invites all of you gentlemen to dine with
him after your visit to the hermitage. At one o'clock, not later.
And you also,</q> he added, addressing Maximov.
</p>

<p>
<q>That I certainly will, without fail,</q> cried Fyodor Pavlovitch,
hugely delighted at the invitation. <q>And, believe me, we've all
given our word to behave properly here.... And you, Pyotr
Alexandrovitch, will you go, too?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, of course. What have I come for but to study all the
customs here? The only obstacle to me is your company....</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, Dmitri Fyodorovitch is non-existent as yet.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>It would be a capital thing if he didn't turn up. Do you suppose
I like all this business, and in your company, too? So we will
come to dinner. Thank the Father Superior,</q> he said to the monk.
</p>

<p>
<q>No, it is my duty now to conduct you to the elder,</q> answered
the monk.
</p>

<p>
<q>If so I'll go straight to the Father Superior&mdash;to the Father
Superior,</q> babbled Maximov.
</p>

<pb n='034'/><anchor id='Pg034'/>

<p>
<q>The Father Superior is engaged just now. But as you please&mdash;</q>
the monk hesitated.
</p>

<p>
<q>Impertinent old man!</q> Miüsov observed aloud, while Maximov
ran back to the monastery.
</p>

<p>
<q>He's like von Sohn,</q> Fyodor Pavlovitch said suddenly.
</p>

<p>
<q>Is that all you can think of?... In what way is he like von
Sohn? Have you ever seen von Sohn?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I've seen his portrait. It's not the features, but something indefinable.
He's a second von Sohn. I can always tell from the
physiognomy.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ah, I dare say you are a connoisseur in that. But, look here,
Fyodor Pavlovitch, you said just now that we had given our word
to behave properly. Remember it. I advise you to control yourself.
But, if you begin to play the fool I don't intend to be associated with
you here.... You see what a man he is</q>&mdash;he turned to the monk&mdash;<q>I'm
afraid to go among decent people with him.</q> A fine smile,
not without a certain slyness, came on to the pale, bloodless lips of
the monk, but he made no reply, and was evidently silent from a
sense of his own dignity. Miüsov frowned more than ever.
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, devil take them all! An outer show elaborated through
centuries, and nothing but charlatanism and nonsense underneath,</q>
flashed through Miüsov's mind.
</p>

<p>
<q>Here's the hermitage. We've arrived,</q> cried Fyodor Pavlovitch.
<q>The gates are shut.</q>
</p>

<p>
And he repeatedly made the sign of the cross to the saints painted
above and on the sides of the gates.
</p>

<p>
<q>When you go to Rome you must do as the Romans do. Here
in this hermitage there are twenty-five saints being saved. They
look at one another, and eat cabbages. And not one woman goes in
at this gate. That's what is remarkable. And that really is so. But
I did hear that the elder receives ladies,</q> he remarked suddenly to
the monk.
</p>

<p>
<q>Women of the people are here too now, lying in the portico there
waiting. But for ladies of higher rank two rooms have been built
adjoining the portico, but outside the precincts&mdash;you can see the
windows&mdash;and the elder goes out to them by an inner passage when
he is well enough. They are always outside the precincts. There is
a Harkov lady, Madame Hohlakov, waiting there now with her sick
<pb n='035'/><anchor id='Pg035'/>
daughter. Probably he has promised to come out to her, though
of late he has been so weak that he has hardly shown himself even
to the people.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>So then there are loopholes, after all, to creep out of the hermitage
to the ladies. Don't suppose, holy father, that I mean any
harm. But do you know that at Athos not only the visits of
women are not allowed, but no creature of the female sex&mdash;no hens,
nor turkey-hens, nor cows.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Fyodor Pavlovitch, I warn you I shall go back and leave you
here. They'll turn you out when I'm gone.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But I'm not interfering with you, Pyotr Alexandrovitch. Look,</q>
he cried suddenly, stepping within the precincts, <q>what a vale of
roses they live in!</q>
</p>

<p>
Though there were no roses now, there were numbers of rare and
beautiful autumn flowers growing wherever there was space for
them, and evidently tended by a skillful hand; there were flower-beds
round the church, and between the tombs; and the one-storied
wooden house where the elder lived was also surrounded with flowers.
</p>

<p>
<q>And was it like this in the time of the last elder, Varsonofy?
He didn't care for such elegance. They say he used to jump up and
thrash even ladies with a stick,</q> observed Fyodor Pavlovitch, as he
went up the steps.
</p>

<p>
<q>The elder Varsonofy did sometimes seem rather strange, but a
great deal that's told is foolishness. He never thrashed any one,</q>
answered the monk. <q>Now, gentlemen, if you will wait a minute
I will announce you.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Fyodor Pavlovitch, for the last time, your compact, do you
hear? Behave properly or I will pay you out!</q> Miüsov had time to
mutter again.
</p>

<p>
<q>I can't think why you are so agitated,</q> Fyodor Pavlovitch observed
sarcastically. <q>Are you uneasy about your sins? They say
he can tell by one's eyes what one has come about. And what a lot
you think of their opinion! you, a Parisian, and so advanced. I'm
surprised at you.</q>
</p>

<p>
But Miüsov had no time to reply to this sarcasm. They were
asked to come in. He walked in, somewhat irritated.
</p>

<p>
<q>Now, I know myself, I am annoyed, I shall lose my temper and
begin to quarrel&mdash;and lower myself and my ideas,</q> he reflected.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='036'/><anchor id='Pg036'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II. The Old Buffoon</head>

<p>
They entered the room almost at the same moment that the
elder came in from his bedroom. There were already in the
cell, awaiting the elder, two monks of the hermitage, one the
Father Librarian, and the other Father Païssy, a very learned man, so
they said, in delicate health, though not old. There was also a tall
young man, who looked about two and twenty, standing in the
corner throughout the interview. He had a broad, fresh face, and
clever, observant, narrow brown eyes, and was wearing ordinary
dress. He was a divinity student, living under the protection of
the monastery. His expression was one of unquestioning, but self-respecting,
reverence. Being in a subordinate and dependent position,
and so not on an equality with the guests, he did not greet
them with a bow.
</p>

<p>
Father Zossima was accompanied by a novice, and by Alyosha.
The two monks rose and greeted him with a very deep bow, touching
the ground with their fingers; then kissed his hand. Blessing
them, the elder replied with as deep a reverence to them, and asked
their blessing. The whole ceremony was performed very seriously
and with an appearance of feeling, not like an everyday rite. But
Miüsov fancied that it was all done with intentional impressiveness.
He stood in front of the other visitors. He ought&mdash;he had reflected
upon it the evening before&mdash;from simple politeness, since it was
the custom here, to have gone up to receive the elder's blessing,
even if he did not kiss his hand. But when he saw all this bowing
and kissing on the part of the monks he instantly changed his mind.
With dignified gravity he made a rather deep, conventional bow, and
moved away to a chair. Fyodor Pavlovitch did the same, mimicking
Miüsov like an ape. Ivan bowed with great dignity and courtesy,
but he too kept his hands at his sides, while Kalganov was so confused
that he did not bow at all. The elder let fall the hand raised
to bless them, and bowing to them again, asked them all to sit down.
The blood rushed to Alyosha's cheeks. He was ashamed. His forebodings
were coming true.
</p>

<pb n='037'/><anchor id='Pg037'/>

<p>
Father Zossima sat down on a very old-fashioned mahogany sofa,
covered with leather, and made his visitors sit down in a row along
the opposite wall on four mahogany chairs, covered with shabby
black leather. The monks sat, one at the door and the other at the
window. The divinity student, the novice, and Alyosha remained
standing. The cell was not very large and had a faded look. It contained
nothing but the most necessary furniture, of coarse and poor
quality. There were two pots of flowers in the window, and a number
of holy pictures in the corner. Before one huge ancient ikon of
the Virgin a lamp was burning. Near it were two other holy pictures
in shining settings, and, next them, carved cherubims, china
eggs, a Catholic cross of ivory, with a Mater Dolorosa embracing it,
and several foreign engravings from the great Italian artists of past
centuries. Next to these costly and artistic engravings were several
of the roughest Russian prints of saints and martyrs, such as are
sold for a few farthings at all the fairs. On the other walls were
portraits of Russian bishops, past and present.
</p>

<p>
Miüsov took a cursory glance at all these <q>conventional</q> surroundings
and bent an intent look upon the elder. He had a high
opinion of his own insight, a weakness excusable in him as he was
fifty, an age at which a clever man of the world of established
position can hardly help taking himself rather seriously. At the first
moment he did not like Zossima. There was, indeed, something in
the elder's face which many people besides Miüsov might not have
liked. He was a short, bent, little man, with very weak legs, and
though he was only sixty-five, he looked at least ten years older.
His face was very thin and covered with a network of fine wrinkles,
particularly numerous about his eyes, which were small, light-colored,
quick, and shining like two bright points. He had a sprinkling
of gray hair about his temples. His pointed beard was small
and scanty, and his lips, which smiled frequently, were as thin as
two threads. His nose was not long, but sharp, like a bird's beak.
</p>

<p>
<q>To all appearances a malicious soul, full of petty pride,</q> thought
Miüsov. He felt altogether dissatisfied with his position.
</p>

<p>
A cheap little clock on the wall struck twelve hurriedly, and
served to begin the conversation.
</p>

<p>
<q>Precisely to our time,</q> cried Fyodor Pavlovitch, <q>but no sign
of my son, Dmitri. I apologize for him, sacred elder!</q> (Alyosha
<pb n='038'/><anchor id='Pg038'/>
shuddered all over at <q>sacred elder.</q>) <q>I am always punctual myself,
minute for minute, remembering that punctuality is the courtesy
of kings....</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But you are not a king, anyway,</q> Miüsov muttered, losing his
self-restraint at once.
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes; that's true. I'm not a king, and, would you believe it,
Pyotr Alexandrovitch, I was aware of that myself. But, there! I
always say the wrong thing. Your reverence,</q> he cried, with sudden
pathos, <q>you behold before you a buffoon in earnest! I introduce
myself as such. It's an old habit, alas! And if I sometimes
talk nonsense out of place it's with an object, with the object of
amusing people and making myself agreeable. One must be agreeable,
mustn't one? I was seven years ago in a little town where I
had business, and I made friends with some merchants there. We
went to the captain of police because we had to see him about
something, and to ask him to dine with us. He was a tall, fat, fair,
sulky man, the most dangerous type in such cases. It's their liver.
I went straight up to him, and with the ease of a man of the world,
you know, <q>Mr. Ispravnik,</q> said I, <q>be our Napravnik.</q> <q>What do
you mean by Napravnik?</q> said he. I saw, at the first half-second,
that it had missed fire. He stood there so glum. <q>I wanted to make
a joke,</q> said I, <q>for the general diversion, as Mr. Napravnik is our
well-known Russian orchestra conductor and what we need for the
harmony of our undertaking is some one of that sort.</q> And I
explained my comparison very reasonably, didn't I? <q>Excuse me,</q>
said he, <q>I am an Ispravnik, and I do not allow puns to be made on
my calling.</q> He turned and walked away. I followed him, shouting,
<q>Yes, yes, you are an Ispravnik, not a Napravnik.</q> <q>No,</q> he
said, <q>since you called me a Napravnik I am one.</q> And would you
believe it, it ruined our business! And I'm always like that, always
like that. Always injuring myself with my politeness. Once, many
years ago, I said to an influential person: <q>Your wife is a ticklish
lady,</q> in an honorable sense, of the moral qualities, so to speak. But
he asked me, <q>Why, have you tickled her?</q> I thought I'd be polite,
so I couldn't help saying, <q>Yes,</q> and he gave me a fine tickling on
the spot. Only that happened long ago, so I'm not ashamed to tell
the story. I'm always injuring myself like that.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>You're doing it now,</q> muttered Miüsov, with disgust.
</p>

<pb n='039'/><anchor id='Pg039'/>

<p>
Father Zossima scrutinized them both in silence.
</p>

<p>
<q>Am I? Would you believe it, I was aware of that, too, Pyotr
Alexandrovitch, and let me tell you, indeed, I foresaw I should as
soon as I began to speak. And do you know I foresaw, too, that
you'd be the first to remark on it. The minute I see my joke isn't
coming off, your reverence, both my cheeks feel as though they
were drawn down to the lower jaw and there is almost a spasm in
them. That's been so since I was young, when I had to make jokes
for my living in noblemen's families. I am an inveterate buffoon,
and have been from birth up, your reverence, it's as though it were
a craze in me. I dare say it's a devil within me. But only a little
one. A more serious one would have chosen another lodging. But
not your soul, Pyotr Alexandrovitch; you're not a lodging worth
having either. But I do believe&mdash;I believe in God, though I have
had doubts of late. But now I sit and await words of wisdom.
I'm like the philosopher, Diderot, your reverence. Did you ever
hear, most Holy Father, how Diderot went to see the Metropolitan
Platon, in the time of the Empress Catherine? He went in and
said straight out, <q>There is no God.</q> To which the great bishop
lifted up his finger and answered, <q>The fool hath said in his heart
there is no God.</q> And he fell down at his feet on the spot. <q>I
believe,</q> he cried, <q>and will be christened.</q> And so he was. Princess
Dashkov was his godmother, and Potyomkin his godfather.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Fyodor Pavlovitch, this is unbearable! You know you're telling
lies and that that stupid anecdote isn't true. Why are you playing
the fool?</q> cried Miüsov in a shaking voice.
</p>

<p>
<q>I suspected all my life that it wasn't true,</q> Fyodor Pavlovitch
cried with conviction. <q>But I'll tell you the whole truth, gentlemen.
Great elder! Forgive me, the last thing about Diderot's
christening I made up just now. I never thought of it before. I
made it up to add piquancy. I play the fool, Pyotr Alexandrovitch,
to make myself agreeable. Though I really don't know myself,
sometimes, what I do it for. And as for Diderot, I heard as far as
<q>the fool hath said in his heart</q> twenty times from the gentry about
here when I was young. I heard your aunt, Pyotr Alexandrovitch,
tell the story. They all believe to this day that the infidel Diderot
came to dispute about God with the Metropolitan Platon....</q>
</p>

<pb n='040'/><anchor id='Pg040'/>

<p>
Miüsov got up, forgetting himself in his impatience. He was
furious, and conscious of being ridiculous.
</p>

<p>
What was taking place in the cell was really incredible. For forty
or fifty years past, from the times of former elders, no visitors had
entered that cell without feelings of the profoundest veneration.
Almost every one admitted to the cell felt that a great favor was
being shown him. Many remained kneeling during the whole visit.
Of those visitors, many had been men of high rank and learning,
some even freethinkers, attracted by curiosity, but all without exception
had shown the profoundest reverence and delicacy, for here
there was no question of money, but only, on the one side love and
kindness, and on the other penitence and eager desire to decide some
spiritual problem or crisis. So that such buffoonery amazed and bewildered
the spectators, or at least some of them. The monks, with
unchanged countenances, waited, with earnest attention, to hear
what the elder would say, but seemed on the point of standing up,
like Miüsov. Alyosha stood, with hanging head, on the verge of
tears. What seemed to him strangest of all was that his brother
Ivan, on whom alone he had rested his hopes, and who alone had such
influence on his father that he could have stopped him, sat now quite
unmoved, with downcast eyes, apparently waiting with interest to
see how it would end, as though he had nothing to do with it.
Alyosha did not dare to look at Rakitin, the divinity student, whom
he knew almost intimately. He alone in the monastery knew Rakitin's
thoughts.
</p>

<p>
<q>Forgive me,</q> began Miüsov, addressing Father Zossima, <q>for
perhaps I seem to be taking part in this shameful foolery. I made
a mistake in believing that even a man like Fyodor Pavlovitch would
understand what was due on a visit to so honored a personage. I
did not suppose I should have to apologize simply for having come
with him....</q>
</p>

<p>
Pyotr Alexandrovitch could say no more, and was about to leave
the room, overwhelmed with confusion.
</p>

<p>
<q>Don't distress yourself, I beg.</q> The elder got on to his feeble
legs, and taking Pyotr Alexandrovitch by both hands, made him sit
down again. <q>I beg you not to disturb yourself. I particularly beg
you to be my guest.</q> And with a bow he went back and sat down
again on his little sofa.
</p>

<pb n='041'/><anchor id='Pg041'/>

<p>
<q>Great elder, speak! Do I annoy you by my vivacity?</q> Fyodor
Pavlovitch cried suddenly, clutching the arms of his chair in both
hands, as though ready to leap up from it if the answer were unfavorable.
</p>

<p>
<q>I earnestly beg you, too, not to disturb yourself, and not to be
uneasy,</q> the elder said impressively. <q>Do not trouble. Make yourself
quite at home. And, above all, do not be so ashamed of yourself,
for that is at the root of it all.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Quite at home? To be my natural self? Oh, that is much too
much, but I accept it with grateful joy. Do you know, blessed
Father, you'd better not invite me to be my natural self. Don't
risk it.... I will not go so far as that myself. I warn you for
your own sake. Well, the rest is still plunged in the mists of uncertainty,
though there are people who'd be pleased to describe me for
you. I mean that for you, Pyotr Alexandrovitch. But as for you,
holy being, let me tell you, I am brimming over with ecstasy.</q>
</p>

<p>
He got up, and throwing up his hands, declaimed, <q>Blessed be
the womb that bare thee, and the paps that gave thee suck&mdash;the
paps especially. When you said just now, <q>Don't be so ashamed of
yourself, for that is at the root of it all,</q> you pierced right through
me by that remark, and read me to the core. Indeed, I always feel
when I meet people that I am lower than all, and that they all take
me for a buffoon. So I say, <q>Let me really play the buffoon. I am
not afraid of your opinion, for you are every one of you worse than
I am.</q> That is why I am a buffoon. It is from shame, great elder,
from shame; it's simply over-sensitiveness that makes me rowdy.
If I had only been sure that every one would accept me as the kindest
and wisest of men, oh, Lord, what a good man I should have
been then! Teacher!</q> he fell suddenly on his knees, <q>what must I
do to gain eternal life?</q>
</p>

<p>
It was difficult even now to decide whether he was joking or really
moved.
</p>

<p>
Father Zossima, lifting his eyes, looked at him, and said with a
smile:
</p>

<p>
<q>You have known for a long time what you must do. You
have sense enough: don't give way to drunkenness and incontinence
of speech; don't give way to sensual lust; and, above all, to the
<pb n='042'/><anchor id='Pg042'/>
love of money. And close your taverns. If you can't close all,
at least two or three. And, above all&mdash;don't lie.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>You mean about Diderot?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>No, not about Diderot. Above all, don't lie to yourself. The
man who lies to himself and listens to his own lie comes to such a
pass that he cannot distinguish the truth within him, or around
him, and so loses all respect for himself and for others. And having
no respect he ceases to love, and in order to occupy and distract
himself without love he gives way to passions and coarse pleasures,
and sinks to bestiality in his vices, all from continual lying to other
men and to himself. The man who lies to himself can be more easily
offended than any one. You know it is sometimes very pleasant
to take offense, isn't it? A man may know that nobody has insulted
him, but that he has invented the insult for himself, has lied and
exaggerated to make it picturesque, has caught at a word and made
a mountain out of a molehill&mdash;he knows that himself, yet he will
be the first to take offense, and will revel in his resentment till he
feels great pleasure in it, and so pass to genuine vindictiveness. But
get up, sit down, I beg you. All this, too, is deceitful posturing....</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Blessed man! Give me your hand to kiss.</q>
</p>

<p>
Fyodor Pavlovitch skipped up, and imprinted a rapid kiss on the
elder's thin hand. <q>It is, it is pleasant to take offense. You said
that so well, as I never heard it before. Yes, I have been all my life
taking offense, to please myself, taking offense on esthetic grounds,
for it is not so much pleasant as distinguished sometimes to be insulted&mdash;that
you had forgotten, great elder, it is distinguished! I
shall make a note of that. But I have been lying, lying positively
my whole life long, every day and hour of it. Of a truth, I am a
lie, and the father of lies. Though I believe I am not the father of
lies. I am getting mixed in my texts. Say, the son of lies, and that
will be enough. Only ... my angel ... I may sometimes talk
about Diderot! Diderot will do no harm, though sometimes a word
will do harm. Great elder, by the way, I was forgetting, though I
had been meaning for the last two years to come here on purpose
to ask and to find out something. Only do tell Pyotr Alexandrovitch
not to interrupt me. Here is my question: Is it true, great
Father, that the story is told somewhere in the <hi rend='italic'>Lives of the Saints</hi>
<pb n='043'/><anchor id='Pg043'/>
of a holy saint martyred for his faith who, when his head was cut
off at last, stood up, picked up his head, and, <q>courteously kissing
it,</q> walked a long way, carrying it in his hands. Is that true or not,
honored Father?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>No, it is untrue,</q> said the elder.
</p>

<p>
<q>There is nothing of the kind in all the lives of the saints. What
saint do you say the story is told of?</q> asked the Father Librarian.
</p>

<p>
<q>I do not know what saint. I do not know, and can't tell. I
was deceived. I was told the story. I had heard it, and do you
know who told it? Pyotr Alexandrovitch Miüsov here, who was
so angry just now about Diderot. He it was who told the story.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I have never told it you, I never speak to you at all.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>It is true you did not tell me, but you told it when I was present.
It was three years ago. I mentioned it because by that ridiculous
story you shook my faith, Pyotr Alexandrovitch. You knew
nothing of it, but I went home with my faith shaken, and I have
been getting more and more shaken ever since. Yes, Pyotr Alexandrovitch,
you were the cause of a great fall. That was not a
Diderot!</q>
</p>

<p>
Fyodor Pavlovitch got excited and pathetic, though it was perfectly
clear to every one by now that he was playing a part again.
Yet Miüsov was stung by his words.
</p>

<p>
<q>What nonsense, and it is all nonsense,</q> he muttered. <q>I may
really have told it, some time or other ... but not to you. I was
told it myself. I heard it in Paris from a Frenchman. He told me
it was read at our mass from the <hi rend='italic'>Lives of the Saints</hi> ... he was
a very learned man who had made a special study of Russian statistics
and had lived a long time in Russia.... I have not read
the <hi rend='italic'>Lives of the Saints</hi> myself, and I am not going to read them ...
all sorts of things are said at dinner&mdash;we were dining then.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, you were dining then, and so I lost my faith!</q> said Fyodor
Pavlovitch, mimicking him.
</p>

<p>
<q>What do I care for your faith?</q> Miüsov was on the point of
shouting, but he suddenly checked himself, and said with contempt,
<q>You defile everything you touch.</q>
</p>

<p>
The elder suddenly rose from his seat. <q>Excuse me, gentlemen,
for leaving you a few minutes,</q> he said, addressing all his guests.
<q>I have visitors awaiting me who arrived before you. But don't
<pb n='044'/><anchor id='Pg044'/>
you tell lies all the same,</q> he added, turning to Fyodor Pavlovitch
with a good-humored face. He went out of the cell. Alyosha and
the novice flew to escort him down the steps. Alyosha was breathless:
he was glad to get away, but he was glad, too, that the elder
was good-humored and not offended. Father Zossima was going
towards the portico to bless the people waiting for him there. But
Fyodor Pavlovitch persisted in stopping him at the door of the cell.
</p>

<p>
<q>Blessed man!</q> he cried, with feeling. <q>Allow me to kiss your
hand once more. Yes, with you I could still talk, I could still get
on. Do you think I always lie and play the fool like this? Believe
me, I have been acting like this all the time on purpose to try you.
I have been testing you all the time to see whether I could get on
with you. Is there room for my humility beside your pride? I am
ready to give you a testimonial that one can get on with you! But
now, I'll be quiet; I will keep quiet all the time. I'll sit in a chair
and hold my tongue. Now it is for you to speak, Pyotr Alexandrovitch.
You are the principal person left now&mdash;for ten minutes.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III. Peasant Women Who Have Faith</head>

<p>
Near the wooden portico below, built on to the outer wall of
the precinct, there was a crowd of about twenty peasant
women. They had been told that the elder was at last coming out,
and they had gathered together in anticipation. Two ladies, Madame
Hohlakov and her daughter, had also come out into the portico to
wait for the elder, but in a separate part of it set aside for women
of rank.
</p>

<p>
Madame Hohlakov was a wealthy lady, still young and attractive,
and always dressed with taste. She was rather pale, and had
lively black eyes. She was not more than thirty-three, and had
been five years a widow. Her daughter, a girl of fourteen, was partially
paralyzed. The poor child had not been able to walk for the
last six months, and was wheeled about in a long reclining chair.
She had a charming little face, rather thin from illness, but full of
gayety. There was a gleam of mischief in her big dark eyes with
<pb n='045'/><anchor id='Pg045'/>
their long lashes. Her mother had been intending to take her
abroad ever since the spring, but they had been detained all the
summer by business connected with their estate. They had been staying
a week in our town, where they had come more for purposes of
business than devotion, but had visited Father Zossima once already,
three days before. Though they knew that the elder scarcely saw
any one, they had now suddenly turned up again, and urgently entreated
<q>the happiness of looking once again on the great healer.</q>
</p>

<p>
The mother was sitting on a chair by the side of her daughter's
invalid carriage, and two paces from her stood an old monk, not one
of our monastery, but a visitor from an obscure religious house in the
far north. He too sought the elder's blessing.
</p>

<p>
But Father Zossima, on entering the portico, went first straight
to the peasants who were crowded at the foot of the three steps that
led up into the portico. Father Zossima stood on the top step, put
on his stole, and began blessing the women who thronged about him.
One crazy woman was led up to him. As soon as she caught sight
of the elder she began shrieking and writhing as though in the pains
of childbirth. Laying the stole on her forehead, he read a short
prayer over her, and she was at once soothed and quieted.
</p>

<p>
I do not know how it may be now, but in my childhood I often
happened to see and hear these <q>possessed</q> women in the villages
and monasteries. They used to be brought to mass; they would
squeal and bark like a dog so that they were heard all over the
church. But when the sacrament was carried in and they were led
up to it, at once the <q>possession</q> ceased, and the sick women were
always soothed for a time. I was greatly impressed and amazed at
this as a child; but then I heard from country neighbors and from
my town teachers that the whole illness was simulated to avoid
work, and that it could always be cured by suitable severity; various
anecdotes were told to confirm this. But later on I learnt with
astonishment from medical specialists that there is no pretense about
it, that it is a terrible illness to which women are subject, specially
prevalent among us in Russia, and that it is due to the hard lot of
the peasant women. It is a disease, I was told, arising from exhausting
toil too soon after hard, abnormal and unassisted labor in childbirth,
and from the hopeless misery, from beatings, and so on, which
some women were not able to endure like others. The strange and
<pb n='046'/><anchor id='Pg046'/>
instant healing of the frantic and struggling woman as soon as she
was led up to the holy sacrament, which had been explained to me
as due to malingering and the trickery of the <q>clericals,</q> arose
probably in the most natural manner. Both the women who supported
her and the invalid herself fully believed as a truth beyond
question that the evil spirit in possession of her could not hold out
if the sick woman were brought to the sacrament and made to bow
down before it. And so, with a nervous and psychically deranged
woman, a sort of convulsion of the whole organism always took
place, and was bound to take place, at the moment of bowing down
to the sacrament, aroused by the expectation of the miracle of healing
and the implicit belief that it would come to pass; and it did
come to pass, though only for a moment. It was exactly the same
now as soon as the elder touched the sick woman with the stole.
</p>

<p>
Many of the women in the crowd were moved to tears of ecstasy
by the effect of the moment: some strove to kiss the hem of his garment,
others cried out in sing-song voices.
</p>

<p>
He blessed them all and talked with some of them. The <q>possessed</q>
woman he knew already. She came from a village only six
versts from the monastery, and had been brought to him before.
</p>

<p>
<q>But here is one from afar.</q> He pointed to a woman by no
means old but very thin and wasted, with a face not merely sunburnt
but almost blackened by exposure. She was kneeling and gazing
with a fixed stare at the elder; there was something almost frenzied
in her eyes.
</p>

<p>
<q>From afar off, Father, from afar off! From two hundred miles
from here. From afar off, Father, from afar off!</q> the woman
began in a sing-song voice as though she were chanting a dirge,
swaying her head from side to side with her cheek resting in her
hand.
</p>

<p>
There is silent and long-suffering sorrow to be met with among
the peasantry. It withdraws into itself and is still. But there is a
grief that breaks out, and from that minute it bursts into tears and
finds vent in wailing. This is particularly common with women.
But it is no lighter a grief than the silent. Lamentations comfort
only by lacerating the heart still more. Such grief does not desire
consolation. It feeds on the sense of its hopelessness. Lamentations
spring only from the constant craving to reopen the wound.
</p>

<pb n='047'/><anchor id='Pg047'/>

<p>
<q>You are of the tradesman class?</q> said Father Zossima, looking
curiously at her.
</p>

<p>
<q>Townfolk we are, Father, townfolk. Yet we are peasants though
we live in the town. I have come to see you, O Father! We heard
of you, Father, we heard of you. I have buried my little son, and I
have come on a pilgrimage. I have been in three monasteries, but
they told me, <q>Go, Nastasya, go to them</q>&mdash;that is to you. I have
come; I was yesterday at the service, and to-day I have come to
you.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What are you weeping for?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>It's my little son I'm grieving for, Father. He was three years
old&mdash;three years all but three months. For my little boy, Father,
I'm in anguish, for my little boy. He was the last one left. We
had four, my Nikita and I, and now we've no children, our dear ones
have all gone. I buried the first three without grieving overmuch,
and now I have buried the last I can't forget him. He seems always
standing before me. He never leaves me. He has withered my
heart. I look at his little clothes, his little shirt, his little boots, and
I wail. I lay out all that is left of him, all his little things. I look
at them and wail. I say to Nikita, my husband, <q>Let me go on a
pilgrimage, master.</q> He is a driver. We're not poor people,
Father, not poor; he drives our own horse. It's all our own, the
horse and the carriage. And what good is it all to us now? My
Nikita has begun drinking while I am away. He's sure to. It used
to be so before. As soon as I turn my back he gives way to it. But
now I don't think about him. It's three months since I left home.
I've forgotten him. I've forgotten everything. I don't want to
remember. And what would our life be now together? I've done
with him, I've done. I've done with them all. I don't care to look
upon my house and my goods. I don't care to see anything at all!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Listen, mother,</q> said the elder. <q>Once in olden times a holy
saint saw in the Temple a mother like you weeping for her little one,
her only one, whom God had taken. <q>Knowest thou not,</q> said the
saint to her, <q>how bold these little ones are before the throne of
God? Verily there are none bolder than they in the Kingdom of
Heaven. <q>Thou didst give us life, O Lord,</q> they say, <q>and scarcely
had we looked upon it when Thou didst take it back again.</q> And
so boldly they ask and ask again that God gives them at once the
<pb n='048'/><anchor id='Pg048'/>
rank of angels. Therefore,</q> said the saint, <q>thou, too, O mother, rejoice
and weep not, for thy little son is with the Lord in the fellowship
of the angels.</q> That's what the saint said to the weeping
mother of old. He was a great saint and he could not have spoken
falsely. Therefore you too, mother, know that your little one is
surely before the throne of God, is rejoicing and happy, and praying
to God for you, and therefore weep not, but rejoice.</q>
</p>

<p>
The woman listened to him, looking down with her cheek in her
hand. She sighed deeply.
</p>

<p>
<q>My Nikita tried to comfort me with the same words as you.
<q>Foolish one,</q> he said, <q>why weep? Our son is no doubt singing with
the angels before God.</q> He says that to me, but he weeps himself. I
see that he cries like me. <q>I know, Nikita,</q> said I. <q>Where could
he be if not with the Lord God? Only, here with us now he is not
as he used to sit beside us before.</q> And if only I could look upon
him one little time, if only I could peep at him one little time, without
going up to him, without speaking, if I could be hidden in a
corner and only see him for one little minute, hear him playing
in the yard, calling in his little voice, <q>Mammy, where are you?</q>
If only I could hear him pattering with his little feet about the room
just once, only once; for so often, so often I remember how he used
to run to me and shout and laugh, if only I could hear his little feet
I should know him! But he's gone, Father, he's gone, and I shall
never hear him again. Here's his little sash, but him I shall never
see or hear now.</q>
</p>

<p>
She drew out of her bosom her boy's little embroidered sash, and
as soon as she looked at it she began shaking with sobs, hiding her
eyes with her fingers through which the tears flowed in a sudden
stream.
</p>

<p>
<q>It is Rachel of old,</q> said the elder, <q>weeping for her children,
and will not be comforted because they are not. Such is the lot set
on earth for you mothers. Be not comforted. Consolation is not
what you need. Weep and be not consoled, but weep. Only every
time that you weep be sure to remember that your little son is one of
the angels of God, that he looks down from there at you and sees
you, and rejoices at your tears, and points at them to the Lord God;
and a long while yet will you keep that great mother's grief. But
it will turn in the end into quiet joy, and your bitter tears will be
<pb n='049'/><anchor id='Pg049'/>
only tears of tender sorrow that purifies the heart and delivers it
from sin. And I shall pray for the peace of your child's soul.
What was his name?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Alexey, Father.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>A sweet name. After Alexey, the man of God?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, Father.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What a saint he was! I will remember him, mother, and your
grief in my prayers, and I will pray for your husband's health. It is
a sin for you to leave him. Your little one will see from heaven
that you have forsaken his father, and will weep over you. Why
do you trouble his happiness? He is living, for the soul lives for
ever, and though he is not in the house he is near you, unseen. How
can he go into the house when you say that the house is hateful to
you? To whom is he to go if he find you not together, his father
and mother? He comes to you in dreams now, and you grieve. But
then he will send you gentle dreams. Go to your husband, mother;
go this very day.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I will go, Father, at your word. I will go. You've gone
straight to my heart. My Nikita, my Nikita, you are waiting for
me,</q> the woman began in a sing-song voice; but the elder had
already turned away to a very old woman, dressed like a dweller in
the town, not like a pilgrim. Her eyes showed that she had come
with an object, and in order to say something. She said she was
the widow of a non-commissioned officer, and lived close by in the
town. Her son Vasenka was in the commissariat service, and had
gone to Irkutsk in Siberia. He had written twice from there, but
now a year had passed since he had written. She did inquire about
him, but she did not know the proper place to inquire.
</p>

<p>
<q>Only the other day Stepanida Ilyinishna&mdash;she's a rich merchant's
wife&mdash;said to me, <q>You go, Prohorovna, and put your son's
name down for prayer in the church, and pray for the peace of his
soul as though he were dead. His soul will be troubled,</q> she said,
<q>and he will write you a letter.</q> And Stepanida Ilyinishna told me
it was a certain thing which had been many times tried. Only I am
in doubt.... Oh, you light of ours! is it true or false, and would
it be right?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Don't think of it. It's shameful to ask the question. How
is it possible to pray for the peace of a living soul? And his own
<pb n='050'/><anchor id='Pg050'/>
mother too! It's a great sin, akin to sorcery. Only for your ignorance
it is forgiven you. Better pray to the Queen of Heaven,
our swift defense and help, for his good health, and that she may
forgive you for your error. And another thing I will tell you,
Prohorovna. Either he will soon come back to you, your son, or
he will be sure to send a letter. Go, and henceforward be in peace.
Your son is alive, I tell you.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Dear Father, God reward you, our benefactor, who prays for
all of us and for our sins!</q>
</p>

<p>
But the elder had already noticed in the crowd two glowing eyes
fixed upon him. An exhausted, consumptive-looking, though young
peasant woman was gazing at him in silence. Her eyes besought
him, but she seemed afraid to approach.
</p>

<p>
<q>What is it, my child?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Absolve my soul, Father,</q> she articulated softly, and slowly
sank on her knees and bowed down at his feet. <q>I have sinned,
Father. I am afraid of my sin.</q>
</p>

<p>
The elder sat down on the lower step. The woman crept closer
to him, still on her knees.
</p>

<p>
<q>I am a widow these three years,</q> she began in a half-whisper,
with a sort of shudder. <q>I had a hard life with my husband. He
was an old man. He used to beat me cruelly. He lay ill; I thought
looking at him, if he were to get well, if he were to get up again,
what then? And then the thought came to me&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Stay!</q> said the elder, and he put his ear close to her lips.
</p>

<p>
The woman went on in a low whisper, so that it was almost impossible
to catch anything. She had soon done.
</p>

<p>
<q>Three years ago?</q> asked the elder.
</p>

<p>
<q>Three years. At first I didn't think about it, but now I've
begun to be ill, and the thought never leaves me.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Have you come from far?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Over three hundred miles away.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Have you told it in confession?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I have confessed it. Twice I have confessed it.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Have you been admitted to Communion?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes. I am afraid. I am afraid to die.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Fear nothing and never be afraid; and don't fret. If only your
penitence fail not, God will forgive all. There is no sin, and there
<pb n='051'/><anchor id='Pg051'/>
can be no sin on all the earth, which the Lord will not forgive to
the truly repentant! Man cannot commit a sin so great as to exhaust
the infinite love of God. Can there be a sin which could
exceed the love of God? Think only of repentance, continual repentance,
but dismiss fear altogether. Believe that God loves you
as you cannot conceive; that He loves you with your sin, in your sin.
It has been said of old that over one repentant sinner there is more
joy in heaven than over ten righteous men. Go, and fear not. Be
not bitter against men. Be not angry if you are wronged. Forgive
the dead man in your heart what wrong he did you. Be reconciled
with him in truth. If you are penitent, you love. And if you love
you are of God. All things are atoned for, all things are saved by
love. If I, a sinner, even as you are, am tender with you and have
pity on you, how much more will God. Love is such a priceless
treasure that you can redeem the whole world by it, and expiate not
only your own sins but the sins of others.</q>
</p>

<p>
He signed her three times with the cross, took from his own neck
a little ikon and put it upon her. She bowed down to the earth
without speaking.
</p>

<p>
He got up and looked cheerfully at a healthy peasant woman with
a tiny baby in her arms.
</p>

<p>
<q>From Vyshegorye, dear Father.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Five miles you have dragged yourself with the baby. What do
you want?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I've come to look at you. I have been to you before&mdash;or have
you forgotten? You've no great memory if you've forgotten me.
They told us you were ill. Thinks I, I'll go and see him for myself.
Now I see you, and you're not ill! You'll live another twenty
years. God bless you! There are plenty to pray for you; how
should you be ill?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I thank you for all, daughter.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>By the way, I have a thing to ask, not a great one. Here are
sixty copecks. Give them, dear Father, to some one poorer than me.
I thought as I came along, better give through him. He'll know
whom to give to.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Thanks, my dear, thanks! You are a good woman. I love you.
I will do so certainly. Is that your little girl?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>My little girl, Father, Lizaveta.</q>
</p>

<pb n='052'/><anchor id='Pg052'/>

<p>
<q>May the Lord bless you both, you and your babe Lizaveta!
You have gladdened my heart, mother. Farewell, dear children,
farewell, dear ones.</q>
</p>

<p>
He blessed them all and bowed low to them.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IV. A Lady Of Little Faith</head>

<p>
A visitor looking on the scene of his conversation with the
peasants and his blessing them shed silent tears and wiped
them away with her handkerchief. She was a sentimental society
lady of genuinely good disposition in many respects. When the
elder went up to her at last she met him enthusiastically.
</p>

<p>
<q>Ah, what I have been feeling, looking on at this touching scene!...</q>
She could not go on for emotion. <q>Oh, I understand the
people's love for you. I love the people myself. I want to love
them. And who could help loving them, our splendid Russian
people, so simple in their greatness!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>How is your daughter's health? You wanted to talk to me
again?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, I have been urgently begging for it, I have prayed for it!
I was ready to fall on my knees and kneel for three days at your
windows until you let me in. We have come, great healer, to express
our ardent gratitude. You have healed my Lise, healed her
completely, merely by praying over her last Thursday and laying
your hands upon her. We have hastened here to kiss those hands,
to pour out our feelings and our homage.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What do you mean by healed? But she is still lying down in
her chair.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But her night fevers have entirely ceased ever since Thursday,</q>
said the lady with nervous haste. <q>And that's not all. Her legs
are stronger. This morning she got up well; she had slept all night.
Look at her rosy cheeks, her bright eyes! She used to be always
crying, but now she laughs and is gay and happy. This morning
she insisted on my letting her stand up, and she stood up for a whole
<pb n='053'/><anchor id='Pg053'/>
minute without any support. She wagers that in a fortnight she'll
be dancing a quadrille. I've called in Doctor Herzenstube. He
shrugged his shoulders and said, <q>I am amazed; I can make nothing
of it.</q> And would you have us not come here to disturb you, not
fly here to thank you? Lise, thank him&mdash;thank him!</q>
</p>

<p>
Lise's pretty little laughing face became suddenly serious. She
rose in her chair as far as she could and, looking at the elder,
clasped her hands before him, but could not restrain herself and
broke into laughter.
</p>

<p>
<q>It's at him,</q> she said, pointing to Alyosha, with childish vexation
at herself for not being able to repress her mirth.
</p>

<p>
If any one had looked at Alyosha standing a step behind the
elder, he would have caught a quick flush crimsoning his cheeks in
an instant. His eyes shone and he looked down.
</p>

<p>
<q>She has a message for you, Alexey Fyodorovitch. How are
you?</q> the mother went on, holding out her exquisitely gloved hand
to Alyosha.
</p>

<p>
The elder turned round and all at once looked attentively at
Alyosha. The latter went nearer to Lise and, smiling in a strangely
awkward way, held out his hand to her too. Lise assumed an important
air.
</p>

<p>
<q>Katerina Ivanovna has sent you this through me.</q> She handed
him a little note. <q>She particularly begs you to go and see her
as soon as possible; that you will not fail her, but will be sure to
come.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>She asks me to go and see her? Me? What for?</q> Alyosha
muttered in great astonishment. His face at once looked anxious.
<q>Oh, it's all to do with Dmitri Fyodorovitch and&mdash;what has happened
lately,</q> the mother explained hurriedly. <q>Katerina Ivanovna
has made up her mind, but she must see you about it.... Why,
of course, I can't say. But she wants to see you at once. And you
will go to her, of course. It is a Christian duty.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I have only seen her once,</q> Alyosha protested with the same
perplexity.
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, she is such a lofty, incomparable creature! If only for her
suffering.... Think what she has gone through, what she is
enduring now! Think what awaits her! It's all terrible, terrible!</q>
</p>

<pb n='054'/><anchor id='Pg054'/>

<p>
<q>Very well, I will come,</q> Alyosha decided, after rapidly scanning
the brief, enigmatic note, which consisted of an urgent entreaty
that he would come, without any sort of explanation.
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, how sweet and generous that would be of you!</q> cried Lise
with sudden animation. <q>I told mamma you'd be sure not to go.
I said you were saving your soul. How splendid you are! I've always
thought you were splendid. How glad I am to tell you so!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Lise!</q> said her mother impressively, though she smiled after she
had said it.
</p>

<p>
<q>You have quite forgotten us, Alexey Fyodorovitch,</q> she said;
<q>you never come to see us. Yet Lise has told me twice that she is
never happy except with you.</q>
</p>

<p>
Alyosha raised his downcast eyes and again flushed, and again
smiled without knowing why. But the elder was no longer watching
him. He had begun talking to a monk who, as mentioned before,
had been awaiting his entrance by Lise's chair. He was evidently
a monk of the humblest, that is of the peasant, class, of a
narrow outlook, but a true believer, and, in his own way, a stubborn
one. He announced that he had come from the far north, from
Obdorsk, from Saint Sylvester, and was a member of a poor monastery,
consisting of only ten monks. The elder gave him his blessing
and invited him to come to his cell whenever he liked.
</p>

<p>
<q>How can you presume to do such deeds?</q> the monk asked suddenly,
pointing solemnly and significantly at Lise. He was referring
to her <q>healing.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>It's too early, of course, to speak of that. Relief is not complete
cure, and may proceed from different causes. But if there
has been any healing, it is by no power but God's will. It's all from
God. Visit me, Father,</q> he added to the monk. <q>It's not often I
can see visitors. I am ill, and I know that my days are numbered.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, no, no! God will not take you from us. You will live a
long, long time yet,</q> cried the lady. <q>And in what way are you ill?
You look so well, so gay and happy.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I am extraordinarily better to-day. But I know that it's only
for a moment. I understand my disease now thoroughly. If I seem
so happy to you, you could never say anything that would please
me so much. For men are made for happiness, and any one who is
<pb n='055'/><anchor id='Pg055'/>
completely happy has a right to say to himself, <q>I am doing God's
will on earth.</q> All the righteous, all the saints, all the holy martyrs
were happy.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, how you speak! What bold and lofty words!</q> cried the
lady. <q>You seem to pierce with your words. And yet&mdash;happiness,
happiness&mdash;where is it? Who can say of himself that he is happy?
Oh, since you have been so good as to let us see you once more to-day,
let me tell you what I could not utter last time, what I dared
not say, all I am suffering and have been for so long! I am suffering!
Forgive me! I am suffering!</q>
</p>

<p>
And in a rush of fervent feeling she clasped her hands before him.
</p>

<p>
<q>From what specially?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I suffer ... from lack of faith.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Lack of faith in God?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, no, no! I dare not even think of that. But the future life&mdash;it
is such an enigma! And no one, no one can solve it. Listen!
You are a healer, you are deeply versed in the human soul, and of
course I dare not expect you to believe me entirely, but I assure
you on my word of honor that I am not speaking lightly now. The
thought of the life beyond the grave distracts me to anguish, to
terror. And I don't know to whom to appeal, and have not dared
to all my life. And now I am so bold as to ask you. Oh, God!
What will you think of me now?</q>
</p>

<p>
She clasped her hands.
</p>

<p>
<q>Don't distress yourself about my opinion of you,</q> said the elder.
<q>I quite believe in the sincerity of your suffering.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, how thankful I am to you! You see, I shut my eyes and
ask myself if every one has faith, where did it come from? And
then they do say that it all comes from terror at the menacing phenomena
of nature, and that none of it's real. And I say to myself,
<q>What if I've been believing all my life, and when I come to die
there's nothing but the burdocks growing on my grave?</q> as I read
in some author. It's awful! How&mdash;how can I get back my faith?
But I only believed when I was a little child, mechanically, without
thinking of anything. How, how is one to prove it? I have come
now to lay my soul before you and to ask you about it. If I let this
chance slip, no one all my life will answer me. How can I prove it?
How can I convince myself? Oh, how unhappy I am! I stand
<pb n='056'/><anchor id='Pg056'/>
and look about me and see that scarcely any one else cares; no one
troubles his head about it, and I'm the only one who can't stand it.
It's deadly&mdash;deadly!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>No doubt. But there's no proving it, though you can be convinced
of it.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>How?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>By the experience of active love. Strive to love your neighbor
actively and indefatigably. In as far as you advance in love you
will grow surer of the reality of God and of the immortality of your
soul. If you attain to perfect self-forgetfulness in the love of your
neighbor, then you will believe without doubt, and no doubt can
possibly enter your soul. This has been tried. This is certain.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>In active love? There's another question&mdash;and such a question!
You see, I so love humanity that&mdash;would you believe it?&mdash;I often
dream of forsaking all that I have, leaving Lise, and becoming a sister
of mercy. I close my eyes and think and dream, and at that
moment I feel full of strength to overcome all obstacles. No
wounds, no festering sores could at that moment frighten me. I
would bind them up and wash them with my own hands. I would
nurse the afflicted. I would be ready to kiss such wounds.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>It is much, and well that your mind is full of such dreams
and not others. Sometime, unawares, you may do a good deed in
reality.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes. But could I endure such a life for long?</q> the lady went
on fervently, almost frantically. <q>That's the chief question&mdash;that's
my most agonizing question. I shut my eyes and ask myself,
<q>Would you persevere long on that path? And if the patient whose
wounds you are washing did not meet you with gratitude, but worried
you with his whims, without valuing or remarking your
charitable services, began abusing you and rudely commanding you,
and complaining to the superior authorities of you (which often
happens when people are in great suffering)&mdash;what then? Would
you persevere in your love, or not?</q> And do you know, I came with
horror to the conclusion that, if anything could dissipate my love
to humanity, it would be ingratitude. In short, I am a hired servant,
I expect my payment at once&mdash;that is, praise, and the repayment
of love with love. Otherwise I am incapable of loving any
one.</q>
</p>

<pb n='057'/><anchor id='Pg057'/>

<p>
She was in a very paroxysm of self-castigation, and, concluding,
she looked with defiant resolution at the elder.
</p>

<p>
<q>It's just the same story as a doctor once told me,</q> observed
the elder. <q>He was a man getting on in years, and undoubtedly
clever. He spoke as frankly as you, though in jest, in bitter jest.
<q>I love humanity,</q> he said, <q>but I wonder at myself. The more I love
humanity in general, the less I love man in particular. In my
dreams,</q> he said, <q>I have often come to making enthusiastic schemes
for the service of humanity, and perhaps I might actually have faced
crucifixion if it had been suddenly necessary; and yet I am incapable
of living in the same room with any one for two days
together, as I know by experience. As soon as any one is near me,
his personality disturbs my self-complacency and restricts my freedom.
In twenty-four hours I begin to hate the best of men: one
because he's too long over his dinner; another because he has a cold
and keeps on blowing his nose. I become hostile to people the moment
they come close to me. But it has always happened that the
more I detest men individually the more ardent becomes my love
for humanity.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But what's to be done? What can one do in such a case? Must
one despair?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>No. It is enough that you are distressed at it. Do what you
can, and it will be reckoned unto you. Much is done already in you
since you can so deeply and sincerely know yourself. If you have
been talking to me so sincerely, simply to gain approbation for your
frankness, as you did from me just now, then of course you will not
attain to anything in the achievement of real love; it will all get
no further than dreams, and your whole life will slip away like a
phantom. In that case you will naturally cease to think of the
future life too, and will of yourself grow calmer after a fashion
in the end.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>You have crushed me! Only now, as you speak, I understand
that I was really only seeking your approbation for my sincerity
when I told you I could not endure ingratitude. You have revealed
me to myself. You have seen through me and explained me to
myself!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Are you speaking the truth? Well, now, after such a confession,
I believe that you are sincere and good at heart. If you do not
<pb n='058'/><anchor id='Pg058'/>
attain happiness, always remember that you are on the right road,
and try not to leave it. Above all, avoid falsehood, every kind of
falsehood, especially falseness to yourself. Watch over your own
deceitfulness and look into it every hour, every minute. Avoid
being scornful, both to others and to yourself. What seems to you
bad within you will grow purer from the very fact of your observing
it in yourself. Avoid fear, too, though fear is only the consequence
of every sort of falsehood. Never be frightened at your own
faint-heartedness in attaining love. Don't be frightened overmuch
even at your evil actions. I am sorry I can say nothing more consoling
to you, for love in action is a harsh and dreadful thing compared
with love in dreams. Love in dreams is greedy for immediate
action, rapidly performed and in the sight of all. Men will even
give their lives if only the ordeal does not last long but is soon
over, with all looking on and applauding as though on the stage.
But active love is labor and fortitude, and for some people too,
perhaps, a complete science. But I predict that just when you see
with horror that in spite of all your efforts you are getting farther
from your goal instead of nearer to it&mdash;at that very moment I predict
that you will reach it and behold clearly the miraculous power
of the Lord who has been all the time loving and mysteriously
guiding you. Forgive me for not being able to stay longer with you.
They are waiting for me. Good-by.</q>
</p>

<p>
The lady was weeping.
</p>

<p>
<q>Lise, Lise! Bless her&mdash;bless her!</q> she cried, starting up suddenly.
</p>

<p>
<q>She does not deserve to be loved. I have seen her naughtiness
all along,</q> the elder said jestingly. <q>Why have you been laughing
at Alexey?</q>
</p>

<p>
Lise had in fact been occupied in mocking at him all the time.
She had noticed before that Alyosha was shy and tried not to look at
her, and she found this extremely amusing. She waited intently to
catch his eye. Alyosha, unable to endure her persistent stare, was
irresistibly and suddenly drawn to glance at her, and at once she
smiled triumphantly in his face. Alyosha was even more disconcerted
and vexed. At last he turned away from her altogether and
hid behind the elder's back. After a few minutes, drawn by the
same irresistible force, he turned again to see whether he was being
looked at or not, and found Lise almost hanging out of her chair
<pb n='059'/><anchor id='Pg059'/>
to peep sideways at him, eagerly waiting for him to look. Catching
his eye, she laughed so that the elder could not help saying, <q>Why
do you make fun of him like that, naughty girl?</q>
</p>

<p>
Lise suddenly and quite unexpectedly blushed. Her eyes flashed
and her face became quite serious. She began speaking quickly and
nervously in a warm and resentful voice:
</p>

<p>
<q>Why has he forgotten everything, then? He used to carry me
about when I was little. We used to play together. He used to
come to teach me to read, do you know. Two years ago, when he
went away, he said that he would never forget me, that we were
friends for ever, for ever, for ever! And now he's afraid of me all at
once. Am I going to eat him? Why doesn't he want to come near
me? Why doesn't he talk? Why won't he come and see us? It's not
that you won't let him. We know that he goes everywhere. It's
not good manners for me to invite him. He ought to have thought
of it first, if he hasn't forgotten me. No, now he's saving his soul!
Why have you put that long gown on him? If he runs he'll fall.</q>
</p>

<p>
And suddenly she hid her face in her hand and went off into
irresistible, prolonged, nervous, inaudible laughter. The elder listened
to her with a smile, and blessed her tenderly. As she kissed
his hand she suddenly pressed it to her eyes and began crying.
</p>

<p>
<q>Don't be angry with me. I'm silly and good for nothing ...
and perhaps Alyosha's right, quite right, in not wanting to come and
see such a ridiculous girl.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I will certainly send him,</q> said the elder.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter V. So Be It! So Be It!</head>

<p>
The elder's absence from his cell had lasted for about twenty-five
minutes. It was more than half-past twelve, but Dmitri, on
whose account they had all met there, had still not appeared. But
he seemed almost to be forgotten, and when the elder entered the
cell again, he found his guests engaged in eager conversation. Ivan
and the two monks took the leading share in it. Miüsov, too, was
trying to take a part, and apparently very eagerly, in the conversation.
<pb n='060'/><anchor id='Pg060'/>
But he was unsuccessful in this also. He was evidently in the
background, and his remarks were treated with neglect, which increased
his irritability. He had had intellectual encounters with
Ivan before and he could not endure a certain carelessness Ivan
showed him.
</p>

<p>
<q>Hitherto at least I have stood in the front ranks of all that is
progressive in Europe, and here the new generation positively ignores
us,</q> he thought.
</p>

<p>
Fyodor Pavlovitch, who had given his word to sit still and be
quiet, had actually been quiet for some time, but he watched his
neighbor Miüsov with an ironical little smile, obviously enjoying
his discomfiture. He had been waiting for some time to pay off
old scores, and now he could not let the opportunity slip. Bending
over his shoulder he began teasing him again in a whisper.
</p>

<p>
<q>Why didn't you go away just now, after the <q>courteously kissing</q>?
Why did you consent to remain in such unseemly company?
It was because you felt insulted and aggrieved, and you remained
to vindicate yourself by showing off your intelligence. Now you
won't go till you've displayed your intellect to them.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>You again?... On the contrary, I'm just going.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>You'll be the last, the last of all to go!</q> Fyodor Pavlovitch delivered
him another thrust, almost at the moment of Father
Zossima's return.
</p>

<p>
The discussion died down for a moment, but the elder, seating
himself in his former place, looked at them all as though cordially
inviting them to go on. Alyosha, who knew every expression of his
face, saw that he was fearfully exhausted and making a great effort.
Of late he had been liable to fainting fits from exhaustion. His face
had the pallor that was common before such attacks, and his lips
were white. But he evidently did not want to break up the party.
He seemed to have some special object of his own in keeping them.
What object? Alyosha watched him intently.
</p>

<p>
<q>We are discussing this gentleman's most interesting article,</q> said
Father Iosif, the librarian, addressing the elder, and indicating Ivan.
<q>He brings forward much that is new, but I think the argument
cuts both ways. It is an article written in answer to a book by an
ecclesiastical authority on the question of the ecclesiastical court,
and the scope of its jurisdiction.</q>
</p>

<pb n='061'/><anchor id='Pg061'/>

<p>
<q>I'm sorry I have not read your article, but I've heard of it,</q>
said the elder, looking keenly and intently at Ivan.
</p>

<p>
<q>He takes up a most interesting position,</q> continued the Father
Librarian. <q>As far as Church jurisdiction is concerned he is apparently
quite opposed to the separation of Church from State.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>That's interesting. But in what sense?</q> Father Zossima asked
Ivan.
</p>

<p>
The latter, at last, answered him, not condescendingly, as Alyosha
had feared, but with modesty and reserve, with evident goodwill
and apparently without the slightest
<foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>arrière-pensée</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
<q>I start from the position that this confusion of elements, that is,
of the essential principles of Church and State, will, of course, go on
for ever, in spite of the fact that it is impossible for them to mingle,
and that the confusion of these elements cannot lead to any consistent
or even normal results, for there is falsity at the very foundation
of it. Compromise between the Church and State in such
questions as, for instance, jurisdiction, is, to my thinking, impossible
in any real sense. My clerical opponent maintains that the
Church holds a precise and defined position in the State. I maintain,
on the contrary, that the Church ought to include the whole
State, and not simply to occupy a corner in it, and, if this is, for
some reason, impossible at present, then it ought, in reality, to be
set up as the direct and chief aim of the future development of
Christian society!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Perfectly true,</q> Father Païssy, the silent and learned monk,
assented with fervor and decision.
</p>

<p>
<q>The purest Ultramontanism!</q> cried Miüsov impatiently, crossing
and recrossing his legs.
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, well, we have no mountains,</q> cried Father Iosif, and turning
to the elder he continued: <q>Observe the answer he makes to the
following <q>fundamental and essential</q> propositions of his opponent,
who is, you must note, an ecclesiastic. First, that <q>no social organization
can or ought to arrogate to itself power to dispose of the
civic and political rights of its members.</q> Secondly, that <q>criminal
and civil jurisdiction ought not to belong to the Church, and is
inconsistent with its nature, both as a divine institution and as an
organization of men for religious objects,</q> and, finally, in the third
place, <q>the Church is a kingdom not of this world.</q></q>
</p>

<pb n='062'/><anchor id='Pg062'/>

<p>
<q>A most unworthy play upon words for an ecclesiastic!</q> Father
Païssy could not refrain from breaking in again. <q>I have read the
book which you have answered,</q> he added, addressing Ivan, <q>and
was astounded at the words <q>the Church is a kingdom not of this
world.</q> If it is not of this world, then it cannot exist on earth at
all. In the Gospel, the words <q>not of this world</q> are not used in that
sense. To play with such words is indefensible. Our Lord Jesus
Christ came to set up the Church upon earth. The Kingdom of
Heaven, of course, is not of this world, but in Heaven; but it is
only entered through the Church which has been founded and
established upon earth. And so a frivolous play upon words in
such a connection is unpardonable and improper. The Church is, in
truth, a kingdom and ordained to rule, and in the end must undoubtedly
become the kingdom ruling over all the earth. For that
we have the divine promise.</q>
</p>

<p>
He ceased speaking suddenly, as though checking himself. After
listening attentively and respectfully Ivan went on, addressing the
elder with perfect composure and as before with ready cordiality:
</p>

<p>
<q>The whole point of my article lies in the fact that during the
first three centuries Christianity only existed on earth in the Church
and was nothing but the Church. When the pagan Roman Empire
desired to become Christian, it inevitably happened that, by becoming
Christian, it included the Church but remained a pagan State
in very many of its departments. In reality this was bound to
happen. But Rome as a State retained too much of the pagan
civilization and culture, as, for example, in the very objects and
fundamental principles of the State. The Christian Church entering
into the State could, of course, surrender no part of its fundamental
principles&mdash;the rock on which it stands&mdash;and could pursue
no other aims than those which have been ordained and revealed
by God Himself, and among them that of drawing the whole world,
and therefore the ancient pagan State itself, into the Church. In
that way (that is, with a view to the future) it is not the Church
that should seek a definite position in the State, like <q>every social
organization,</q> or as <q>an organization of men for religious purposes</q>
(as my opponent calls the Church), but, on the contrary, every
earthly State should be, in the end, completely transformed into the
Church and should become nothing else but a Church, rejecting
<pb n='063'/><anchor id='Pg063'/>
every purpose incongruous with the aims of the Church. All this
will not degrade it in any way or take from its honor and glory
as a great State, nor from the glory of its rulers, but only turns it
from a false, still pagan, and mistaken path to the true and rightful
path, which alone leads to the eternal goal. This is why the author
of the book <hi rend='italic'>On the Foundations of Church Jurisdiction</hi> would have
judged correctly if, in seeking and laying down those foundations,
he had looked upon them as a temporary compromise inevitable in
our sinful and imperfect days. But as soon as the author ventures
to declare that the foundations which he predicates now, part of
which Father Iosif just enumerated, are the permanent, essential,
and eternal foundations, he is going directly against the Church
and its sacred and eternal vocation. That is the gist of my article.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>That is, in brief,</q> Father Païssy began again, laying stress on each
word, <q>according to certain theories only too clearly formulated
in the nineteenth century, the Church ought to be transformed into
the State, as though this would be an advance from a lower to a
higher form, so as to disappear into it, making way for science, for
the spirit of the age, and civilization. And if the Church resists
and is unwilling, some corner will be set apart for her in the State,
and even that under control&mdash;and this will be so everywhere in all
modern European countries. But Russian hopes and conceptions
demand not that the Church should pass as from a lower into a
higher type into the State, but, on the contrary, that the State should
end by being worthy to become only the Church and nothing else.
So be it! So be it!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, I confess you've reassured me somewhat,</q> Miüsov said
smiling, again crossing his legs. <q>So far as I understand, then, the
realization of such an ideal is infinitely remote, at the second coming
of Christ. That's as you please. It's a beautiful Utopian dream
of the abolition of war, diplomacy, banks, and so on&mdash;something
after the fashion of socialism, indeed. But I imagined that it was
all meant seriously, and that the Church might be <emph>now</emph> going to try
criminals, and sentence them to beating, prison, and even death.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But if there were none but the ecclesiastical court, the Church
would not even now sentence a criminal to prison or to death.
Crime and the way of regarding it would inevitably change, not all
<pb n='064'/><anchor id='Pg064'/>
at once of course, but fairly soon,</q> Ivan replied calmly, without
flinching.
</p>

<p>
<q>Are you serious?</q> Miüsov glanced keenly at him.
</p>

<p>
<q>If everything became the Church, the Church would exclude all
the criminal and disobedient, and would not cut off their heads,</q>
Ivan went on. <q>I ask you, what would become of the excluded?
He would be cut off then not only from men, as now, but from
Christ. By his crime he would have transgressed not only against
men but against the Church of Christ. This is so even now, of
course, strictly speaking, but it is not clearly enunciated, and very,
very often the criminal of to-day compromises with his conscience:
<q>I steal,</q> he says, <q>but I don't go against the Church. I'm not an
enemy of Christ.</q> That's what the criminal of to-day is continually
saying to himself, but when the Church takes the place of the State
it will be difficult for him, in opposition to the Church all over the
world, to say: <q>All men are mistaken, all in error, all mankind are
the false Church. I, a thief and murderer, am the only true Christian
Church.</q> It will be very difficult to say this to himself; it
requires a rare combination of unusual circumstances. Now, on
the other side, take the Church's own view of crime: is it not bound
to renounce the present almost pagan attitude, and to change from
a mechanical cutting off of its tainted member for the preservation
of society, as at present, into completely and honestly adopting the
idea of the regeneration of the man, of his reformation and salvation?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What do you mean? I fail to understand again,</q> Miüsov interrupted.
<q>Some sort of dream again. Something shapeless and even
incomprehensible. What is excommunication? What sort of exclusion?
I suspect you are simply amusing yourself, Ivan Fyodorovitch.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, but you know, in reality it is so now,</q> said the elder suddenly,
and all turned to him at once. <q>If it were not for the
Church of Christ there would be nothing to restrain the criminal
from evil-doing, no real chastisement for it afterwards; none, that
is, but the mechanical punishment spoken of just now, which in the
majority of cases only embitters the heart; and not the real punishment,
the only effectual one, the only deterrent and softening one,
which lies in the recognition of sin by conscience.</q>
</p>

<pb n='065'/><anchor id='Pg065'/>

<p>
<q>How is that, may one inquire?</q> asked Miüsov, with lively
curiosity.
</p>

<p>
<q>Why,</q> began the elder, <q>all these sentences to exile with hard
labor, and formerly with flogging also, reform no one, and what's
more, deter hardly a single criminal, and the number of crimes
does not diminish but is continually on the increase. You must
admit that. Consequently the security of society is not preserved,
for, although the obnoxious member is mechanically cut off and
sent far away out of sight, another criminal always comes to take
his place at once, and often two of them. If anything does preserve
society, even in our time, and does regenerate and transform
the criminal, it is only the law of Christ speaking in his conscience.
It is only by recognizing his wrong-doing as a son of a Christian
society&mdash;that is, of the Church&mdash;that he recognizes his sin against
society&mdash;that is, against the Church. So that it is only against
the Church, and not against the State, that the criminal of to-day
can recognize that he has sinned. If society, as a Church, had jurisdiction,
then it would know when to bring back from exclusion
and to reunite to itself. Now the Church having no real jurisdiction,
but only the power of moral condemnation, withdraws of her
own accord from punishing the criminal actively. She does not
excommunicate him but simply persists in motherly exhortation of
him. What is more, the Church even tries to preserve all Christian
communion with the criminal. She admits him to church services,
to the holy sacrament, gives him alms, and treats him more as a
captive than as a convict. And what would become of the criminal,
O Lord, if even the Christian society&mdash;that is, the Church&mdash;were to
reject him even as the civil law rejects him and cuts him off?
What would become of him if the Church punished him with her
excommunication as the direct consequence of the secular law?
There could be no more terrible despair, at least for a Russian
criminal, for Russian criminals still have faith. Though, who
knows, perhaps then a fearful thing would happen, perhaps the
despairing heart of the criminal would lose its faith and then what
would become of him? But the Church, like a tender, loving
mother, holds aloof from active punishment herself, as the sinner
is too severely punished already by the civil law, and there must
be at least some one to have pity on him. The Church holds aloof,
<pb n='066'/><anchor id='Pg066'/>
above all, because its judgment is the only one that contains the
truth, and therefore cannot practically and morally be united to any
other judgment even as a temporary compromise. She can enter
into no compact about that. The foreign criminal, they say, rarely
repents, for the very doctrines of to-day confirm him in the idea
that his crime is not a crime, but only a reaction against an unjustly
oppressive force. Society cuts him off completely by a force that
triumphs over him mechanically and (so at least they say of themselves
in Europe) accompanies this exclusion with hatred, forgetfulness,
and the most profound indifference as to the ultimate fate
of the erring brother. In this way, it all takes place without the
compassionate intervention of the Church, for in many cases there
are no churches there at all, for though ecclesiastics and splendid
church buildings remain, the churches themselves have long ago
striven to pass from Church into State and to disappear in it completely.
So it seems at least in Lutheran countries. As for Rome,
it was proclaimed a State instead of a Church a thousand years ago.
And so the criminal is no longer conscious of being a member of
the Church and sinks into despair. If he returns to society, often
it is with such hatred that society itself instinctively cuts him off.
You can judge for yourself how it must end. In many cases it
would seem to be the same with us, but the difference is that besides
the established law courts we have the Church too, which always
keeps up relations with the criminal as a dear and still precious son.
And besides that, there is still preserved, though only in thought, the
judgment of the Church, which though no longer existing in practice
is still living as a dream for the future, and is, no doubt, instinctively
recognized by the criminal in his soul. What was said
here just now is true too, that is, that if the jurisdiction of the
Church were introduced in practice in its full force, that is, if the
whole of the society were changed into the Church, not only the
judgment of the Church would have influence on the reformation
of the criminal such as it never has now, but possibly also the crimes
themselves would be incredibly diminished. And there can be no
doubt that the Church would look upon the criminal and the crime
of the future in many cases quite differently and would succeed
in restoring the excluded, in restraining those who plan evil, and in
regenerating the fallen. It is true,</q> said Father Zossima, with a
<pb n='067'/><anchor id='Pg067'/>
smile, <q>the Christian society now is not ready and is only resting
on some seven righteous men, but as they are never lacking, it will
continue still unshaken in expectation of its complete transformation
from a society almost heathen in character into a single universal
and all-powerful Church. So be it, so be it! Even though at
the end of the ages, for it is ordained to come to pass! And there
is no need to be troubled about times and seasons, for the secret
of the times and seasons is in the wisdom of God, in His foresight,
and His love. And what in human reckoning seems still afar off,
may by the Divine ordinance be close at hand, on the eve of its
appearance. And so be it, so be it!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>So be it, so be it!</q> Father Païssy repeated austerely and reverently.
</p>

<p>
<q>Strange, extremely strange!</q> Miüsov pronounced, not so much
with heat as with latent indignation.
</p>

<p>
<q>What strikes you as so strange?</q> Father Iosif inquired cautiously.
</p>

<p>
<q>Why, it's beyond anything!</q> cried Miüsov, suddenly breaking
out; <q>the State is eliminated and the Church is raised to the position
of the State. It's not simply Ultramontanism, it's arch-Ultramontanism!
It's beyond the dreams of Pope Gregory the Seventh!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>You are completely misunderstanding it,</q> said Father Païssy
sternly. <q>Understand, the Church is not to be transformed into the
State. That is Rome and its dream. That is the third temptation
of the devil. On the contrary, the State is transformed into the
Church, will ascend and become a Church over the whole world&mdash;which
is the complete opposite of Ultramontanism and Rome, and
your interpretation, and is only the glorious destiny ordained for the
Orthodox Church. This star will arise in the east!</q>
</p>

<p>
Miüsov was significantly silent. His whole figure expressed extraordinary
personal dignity. A supercilious and condescending
smile played on his lips. Alyosha watched it all with a throbbing
heart. The whole conversation stirred him profoundly. He glanced
casually at Rakitin, who was standing immovable in his place by
the door listening and watching intently though with downcast
eyes. But from the color in his cheeks Alyosha guessed that Rakitin
was probably no less excited, and he knew what caused his excitement.
</p>

<p>
<q>Allow me to tell you one little anecdote, gentlemen,</q> Miüsov
said impressively, with a peculiarly majestic air. <q>Some years ago,
<pb n='068'/><anchor id='Pg068'/>
soon after the <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>coup d'état</foreign>
of December, I happened to be calling
in Paris on an extremely influential personage in the Government,
and I met a very interesting man in his house. This individual
was not precisely a detective but was a sort of superintendent of a
whole regiment of political detectives&mdash;a rather powerful position
in its own way. I was prompted by curiosity to seize the opportunity
of conversation with him. And as he had not come as a
visitor but as a subordinate official bringing a special report, and as
he saw the reception given me by his chief, he deigned to speak
with some openness, to a certain extent only, of course. He was
rather courteous than open, as Frenchmen know how to be courteous,
especially to a foreigner. But I thoroughly understood him. The
subject was the socialist revolutionaries who were at that time persecuted.
I will quote only one most curious remark dropped by this
person. <q>We are not particularly afraid,</q> said he, <q>of all these socialists,
anarchists, infidels, and revolutionists; we keep watch on them
and know all their goings on. But there are a few peculiar men
among them who believe in God and are Christians, but at the same
time are socialists. These are the people we are most afraid of.
They are dreadful people! The socialist who is a Christian is more
to be dreaded than a socialist who is an atheist.</q> The words struck
me at the time, and now they have suddenly come back to me here,
gentlemen.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>You apply them to us, and look upon us as socialists?</q> Father
Païssy asked directly, without beating about the bush.
</p>

<p>
But before Pyotr Alexandrovitch could think what to answer,
the door opened, and the guest so long expected, Dmitri Fyodorovitch,
came in. They had, in fact, given up expecting him, and his
sudden appearance caused some surprise for a moment.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VI. Why Is Such A Man Alive?</head>

<p>
Dmitri Fyodorovitch, a young man of eight and twenty,
of medium height and agreeable countenance, looked older
than his years. He was muscular, and showed signs of considerable
<pb n='069'/><anchor id='Pg069'/>
physical strength. Yet there was something not healthy in his face.
It was rather thin, his cheeks were hollow, and there was an unhealthy
sallowness in their color. His rather large, prominent, dark
eyes had an expression of firm determination, and yet there was a
vague look in them, too. Even when he was excited and talking
irritably, his eyes somehow did not follow his mood, but betrayed
something else, sometimes quite incongruous with what was passing.
<q>It's hard to tell what he's thinking,</q> those who talked to him
sometimes declared. People who saw something pensive and sullen
in his eyes were startled by his sudden laugh, which bore witness
to mirthful and light-hearted thoughts at the very time when his
eyes were so gloomy. A certain strained look in his face was easy
to understand at this moment. Every one knew, or had heard of,
the extremely restless and dissipated life which he had been leading
of late, as well as of the violent anger to which he had been roused
in his quarrels with his father. There were several stories current
in the town about it. It is true that he was irascible by nature, <q>of
an unstable and unbalanced mind,</q> as our justice of the peace,
Katchalnikov, happily described him.
</p>

<p>
He was stylishly and irreproachably dressed in a carefully buttoned
frock-coat. He wore black gloves and carried a top-hat.
Having only lately left the army, he still had mustaches and no
beard. His dark brown hair was cropped short, and combed forward
on his temples. He had the long, determined stride of a
military man. He stood still for a moment on the threshold, and
glancing at the whole party went straight up to the elder, guessing
him to be their host. He made him a low bow, and asked his blessing.
Father Zossima, rising in his chair, blessed him. Dmitri kissed
his hand respectfully, and with intense feeling, almost anger, he
said:
</p>

<p>
<q>Be so generous as to forgive me for having kept you waiting so
long, but Smerdyakov, the valet sent me by my father, in reply to
my inquiries, told me twice over that the appointment was for one.
Now I suddenly learn&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Don't disturb yourself,</q> interposed the elder. <q>No matter. You
are a little late. It's of no consequence....</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I'm extremely obliged to you, and expected no less from your
goodness.</q>
</p>

<pb n='070'/><anchor id='Pg070'/>

<p>
Saying this, Dmitri bowed once more. Then, turning suddenly
towards his father, made him, too, a similarly low and respectful
bow. He had evidently considered it beforehand, and made this
bow in all seriousness, thinking it his duty to show his respect and
good intentions.
</p>

<p>
Although Fyodor Pavlovitch was taken unawares, he was equal
to the occasion. In response to Dmitri's bow he jumped up from his
chair and made his son a bow as low in return. His face was suddenly
solemn and impressive, which gave him a positively malignant
look. Dmitri bowed generally to all present, and without a word
walked to the window with his long, resolute stride, sat down on the
only empty chair, near Father Païssy, and, bending forward, prepared
to listen to the conversation he had interrupted.
</p>

<p>
Dmitri's entrance had taken no more than two minutes, and the
conversation was resumed. But this time Miüsov thought it unnecessary
to reply to Father Païssy's persistent and almost irritable
question.
</p>

<p>
<q>Allow me to withdraw from this discussion,</q> he observed with
a certain well-bred nonchalance. <q>It's a subtle question, too. Here
Ivan Fyodorovitch is smiling at us. He must have something interesting
to say about that also. Ask him.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Nothing special, except one little remark,</q> Ivan replied at once.
<q>European Liberals in general, and even our liberal dilettanti, often
mix up the final results of socialism with those of Christianity.
This wild notion is, of course, a characteristic feature. But it's not
only Liberals and dilettanti who mix up socialism and Christianity,
but, in many cases, it appears, the police&mdash;the foreign police, of
course&mdash;do the same. Your Paris anecdote is rather to the point,
Pyotr Alexandrovitch.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I ask your permission to drop this subject altogether,</q> Miüsov
repeated. <q>I will tell you instead, gentlemen, another interesting
and rather characteristic anecdote of Ivan Fyodorovitch himself.
Only five days ago, in a gathering here, principally of ladies, he
solemnly declared in argument that there was nothing in the whole
world to make men love their neighbors. That there was no law
of nature that man should love mankind, and that, if there had
been any love on earth hitherto, it was not owing to a natural law,
but simply because men have believed in immortality. Ivan Fyodorovitch
<pb n='071'/><anchor id='Pg071'/>
added in parenthesis that the whole natural law lies in that
faith, and that if you were to destroy in mankind the belief in immortality,
not only love but every living force maintaining the
life of the world would at once be dried up. Moreover, nothing
then would be immoral, everything would be lawful, even cannibalism.
That's not all. He ended by asserting that for every individual,
like ourselves, who does not believe in God or immortality,
the moral law of nature must immediately be changed into the exact
contrary of the former religious law, and that egoism, even to crime,
must become not only lawful but even recognized as the inevitable,
the most rational, even honorable outcome of his position. From
this paradox, gentlemen, you can judge of the rest of our eccentric
and paradoxical friend Ivan Fyodorovitch's theories.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Excuse me,</q> Dmitri cried suddenly; <q>if I've heard aright, crime
must not only be permitted but even recognized as the inevitable
and the most rational outcome of his position for every infidel!
Is that so or not?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Quite so,</q> said Father Païssy.
</p>

<p>
<q>I'll remember it.</q>
</p>

<p>
Having uttered these words Dmitri ceased speaking as suddenly
as he had begun. Every one looked at him with curiosity.
</p>

<p>
<q>Is that really your conviction as to the consequences of the
disappearance of the faith in immortality?</q> the elder asked Ivan
suddenly.
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes. That was my contention. There is no virtue if there is
no immortality.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>You are blessed in believing that, or else most unhappy.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Why unhappy?</q> Ivan asked smiling.
</p>

<p>
<q>Because, in all probability you don't believe yourself in the immortality
of your soul, nor in what you have written yourself in
your article on Church jurisdiction.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Perhaps you are right! ... But I wasn't altogether joking,</q>
Ivan suddenly and strangely confessed, flushing quickly.
</p>

<p>
<q>You were not altogether joking. That's true. The question
is still fretting your heart, and not answered. But the martyr likes
sometimes to divert himself with his despair, as it were driven to it
by despair itself. Meanwhile, in your despair, you, too, divert yourself
with magazine articles, and discussions in society, though you
<pb n='072'/><anchor id='Pg072'/>
don't believe your own arguments, and with an aching heart mock
at them inwardly.... That question you have not answered, and
it is your great grief, for it clamors for an answer.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But can it be answered by me? Answered in the affirmative?</q>
Ivan went on asking strangely, still looking at the elder with the
same inexplicable smile.
</p>

<p>
<q>If it can't be decided in the affirmative, it will never be decided
in the negative. You know that that is the peculiarity of your
heart, and all its suffering is due to it. But thank the Creator who
has given you a lofty heart capable of such suffering; of thinking
and seeking higher things, for our dwelling is in the heavens. God
grant that your heart will attain the answer on earth, and may God
bless your path.</q>
</p>

<p>
The elder raised his hand and would have made the sign of the
cross over Ivan from where he stood. But the latter rose from his
seat, went up to him, received his blessing, and kissing his hand
went back to his place in silence. His face looked firm and earnest.
This action and all the preceding conversation, which was so surprising
from Ivan, impressed every one by its strangeness and a certain
solemnity, so that all were silent for a moment, and there was a
look almost of apprehension in Alyosha's face. But Miüsov suddenly
shrugged his shoulders. And at the same moment Fyodor
Pavlovitch jumped up from his seat.
</p>

<p>
<q>Most pious and holy elder,</q> he cried, pointing to Ivan, <q>that is
my son, flesh of my flesh, the dearest of my flesh! He is my most
dutiful Karl Moor, so to speak, while this son who has just come in,
Dmitri, against whom I am seeking justice from you, is the undutiful
Franz Moor&mdash;they are both out of Schiller's <hi rend='italic'>Robbers</hi>, and so
I am the reigning Count von Moor! Judge and save us! We need not
only your prayers but your prophecies!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Speak without buffoonery, and don't begin by insulting the
members of your family,</q> answered the elder, in a faint, exhausted
voice. He was obviously getting more and more fatigued, and his
strength was failing.
</p>

<p>
<q>An unseemly farce which I foresaw when I came here!</q> cried
Dmitri indignantly. He too leapt up. <q>Forgive it, reverend
Father,</q> he added, addressing the elder. <q>I am not a cultivated
man, and I don't even know how to address you properly, but you
<pb n='073'/><anchor id='Pg073'/>
have been deceived and you have been too good-natured in letting
us meet here. All my father wants is a scandal. Why he wants it
only he can tell. He always has some motive. But I believe I
know why&mdash;</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>They all blame me, all of them!</q> cried Fyodor Pavlovitch in his
turn. <q>Pyotr Alexandrovitch here blames me too. You have been
blaming me, Pyotr Alexandrovitch, you have!</q> he turned suddenly
to Miüsov, although the latter was not dreaming of interrupting
him. <q>They all accuse me of having hidden the children's money
in my boots, and cheated them, but isn't there a court of law?
There they will reckon out for you, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, from
your notes, your letters, and your agreements, how much money
you had, how much you have spent, and how much you have left.
Why does Pyotr Alexandrovitch refuse to pass judgment? Dmitri
is not a stranger to him. Because they are all against me, while
Dmitri Fyodorovitch is in debt to me, and not a little, but some
thousands of which I have documentary proof. The whole town is
echoing with his debaucheries. And where he was stationed before,
he several times spent a thousand or two for the seduction of some
respectable girl; we know all about that, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, in its
most secret details. I'll prove it.... Would you believe it, holy
Father, he has captivated the heart of the most honorable of young
ladies of good family and fortune, daughter of a gallant colonel,
formerly his superior officer, who had received many honors and
had the Anna Order on his breast. He compromised the girl by
his promise of marriage, now she is an orphan and here; she is betrothed
to him, yet before her very eyes he is dancing attendance on
a certain enchantress. And although this enchantress has lived in,
so to speak, civil marriage with a respectable man, yet she is of an
independent character, an unapproachable fortress for everybody,
just like a legal wife&mdash;for she is virtuous, yes, holy Fathers, she is
virtuous. Dmitri Fyodorovitch wants to open this fortress with a
golden key, and that's why he is insolent to me now, trying to get
money from me, though he has wasted thousands on this enchantress
already. He's continually borrowing money for the purpose. From
whom do you think? Shall I say, Mitya?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Be silent!</q> cried Dmitri, <q>wait till I'm gone. Don't dare in my
presence to asperse the good name of an honorable girl! That you
<pb n='074'/><anchor id='Pg074'/>
should utter a word about her is an outrage, and I won't permit it!</q>
</p>

<p>
He was breathless.
</p>

<p>
<q>Mitya! Mitya!</q> cried Fyodor Pavlovitch hysterically, squeezing
out a tear. <q>And is your father's blessing nothing to you? If
I curse you, what then?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Shameless hypocrite!</q> exclaimed Dmitri furiously.
</p>

<p>
<q>He says that to his father! his father! What would he be with
others? Gentlemen, only fancy; there's a poor but honorable man
living here, burdened with a numerous family, a captain who got
into trouble and was discharged from the army, but not publicly,
not by court-martial, with no slur on his honor. And three weeks
ago, Dmitri seized him by the beard in a tavern, dragged him out
into the street and beat him publicly, and all because he is an agent
in a little business of mine.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>It's all a lie! Outwardly it's the truth, but inwardly a lie!</q>
Dmitri was trembling with rage. <q>Father, I don't justify my action.
Yes, I confess it publicly, I behaved like a brute to that captain, and
I regret it now, and I'm disgusted with myself for my brutal rage.
But this captain, this agent of yours, went to that lady whom you
call an enchantress, and suggested to her from you, that she should
take I.O.U.'s of mine which were in your possession, and should sue
me for the money so as to get me into prison by means of them, if
I persisted in claiming an account from you of my property. Now
you reproach me for having a weakness for that lady when you
yourself incited her to captivate me! She told me so to my face....
She told me the story and laughed at you.... You wanted to
put me in prison because you are jealous of me with her, because
you'd begun to force your attentions upon her; and I know all
about that, too; she laughed at you for that as well&mdash;you hear&mdash;she
laughed at you as she described it. So here you have this man, this
father who reproaches his profligate son! Gentlemen, forgive my
anger, but I foresaw that this crafty old man would only bring you
together to create a scandal. I had come to forgive him if he held
out his hand; to forgive him, and ask forgiveness! But as he has just
this minute insulted not only me, but an honorable young lady,
for whom I feel such reverence that I dare not take her name in
vain, I have made up my mind to show up his game, though he is
my father....</q>
</p>

<pb n='075'/><anchor id='Pg075'/>

<p>
He could not go on. His eyes were glittering and he breathed
with difficulty. But every one in the cell was stirred. All except
Father Zossima got up from their seats uneasily. The monks looked
austere but waited for guidance from the elder. He sat still, pale,
not from excitement but from the weakness of disease. An imploring
smile lighted up his face; from time to time he raised his
hand, as though to check the storm, and, of course, a gesture from
him would have been enough to end the scene; but he seemed to be
waiting for something and watched them intently as though trying
to make out something which was not perfectly clear to him. At
last Miüsov felt completely humiliated and disgraced.
</p>

<p>
<q>We are all to blame for this scandalous scene,</q> he said hotly.
<q>But I did not foresee it when I came, though I knew with whom
I had to deal. This must be stopped at once! Believe me, your
reverence, I had no precise knowledge of the details that have just
come to light, I was unwilling to believe them, and I learn for the
first time.... A father is jealous of his son's relations with a
woman of loose behavior and intrigues with the creature to get his
son into prison! This is the company in which I have been forced
to be present! I was deceived. I declare to you all that I was as
much deceived as any one.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Dmitri Fyodorovitch,</q> yelled Fyodor Pavlovitch suddenly, in
an unnatural voice, <q>if you were not my son I would challenge you
this instant to a duel ... with pistols, at three paces ... across a
handkerchief,</q> he ended, stamping with both feet.
</p>

<p>
With old liars who have been acting all their lives there are moments
when they enter so completely into their part that they
tremble or shed tears of emotion in earnest, although at that very
moment, or a second later, they are able to whisper to themselves,
<q>You know you are lying, you shameless old sinner! You're acting
now, in spite of your <q>holy</q> wrath.</q>
</p>

<p>
Dmitri frowned painfully, and looked with unutterable contempt
at his father.
</p>

<p>
<q>I thought ... I thought,</q> he said, in a soft and, as it were,
controlled voice, <q>that I was coming to my native place with the
angel of my heart, my betrothed, to cherish his old age, and I find
nothing but a depraved profligate, a despicable clown!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>A duel!</q> yelled the old wretch again, breathless and spluttering
<pb n='076'/><anchor id='Pg076'/>
at each syllable. <q>And you, Pyotr Alexandrovitch Miüsov, let me
tell you that there has never been in all your family a loftier, and
more honest&mdash;you hear&mdash;more honest woman than this <q>creature,</q>
as you have dared to call her! And you, Dmitri Fyodorovitch, have
abandoned your betrothed for that <q>creature,</q> so you must yourself
have thought that your betrothed couldn't hold a candle to her.
That's the woman called a <q>creature</q>!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Shameful!</q> broke from Father Iosif.
</p>

<p>
<q>Shameful and disgraceful!</q> Kalganov, flushing crimson, cried in
a boyish voice, trembling with emotion. He had been silent till
that moment.
</p>

<p>
<q>Why is such a man alive?</q> Dmitri, beside himself with rage,
growled in a hollow voice, hunching up his shoulders till he looked
almost deformed. <q>Tell me, can he be allowed to go on defiling
the earth?</q> He looked round at every one and pointed at the old
man. He spoke evenly and deliberately.
</p>

<p>
<q>Listen, listen, monks, to the parricide!</q> cried Fyodor Pavlovitch,
rushing up to Father Iosif. <q>That's the answer to your <q>shameful!</q>
What is shameful? That <q>creature,</q> that <q>woman of loose behavior</q>
is perhaps holier than you are yourselves, you monks who are seeking
salvation! She fell perhaps in her youth, ruined by her environment.
But she loved much, and Christ himself forgave the woman
<q>who loved much.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
<q>It was not for such love Christ forgave her,</q> broke impatiently
from the gentle Father Iosif.
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, it was for such, monks, it was! You save your souls here,
eating cabbage, and think you are the righteous. You eat a gudgeon
a day, and you think you bribe God with gudgeon.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>This is unendurable!</q> was heard on all sides in the cell.
</p>

<p>
But this unseemly scene was cut short in a most unexpected way.
Father Zossima rose suddenly from his seat. Almost distracted with
anxiety for the elder and every one else, Alyosha succeeded, however,
in supporting him by the arm. Father Zossima moved towards
Dmitri and reaching him sank on his knees before him. Alyosha
thought that he had fallen from weakness, but this was not so. The
elder distinctly and deliberately bowed down at Dmitri's feet till
his forehead touched the floor. Alyosha was so astounded that he
<pb n='077'/><anchor id='Pg077'/>
failed to assist him when he got up again. There was a faint smile
on his lips.
</p>

<p>
<q>Good-by! Forgive me, all of you!</q> he said, bowing on all sides
to his guests.
</p>

<p>
Dmitri stood for a few moments in amazement. Bowing down
to him&mdash;what did it mean? Suddenly he cried aloud, <q>Oh, God!</q>
hid his face in his hands, and rushed out of the room. All the
guests flocked out after him, in their confusion not saying good-by,
or bowing to their host. Only the monks went up to him again
for a blessing.
</p>

<p>
<q>What did it mean, falling at his feet like that? Was it symbolic
or what?</q> said Fyodor Pavlovitch, suddenly quieted and trying to
reopen conversation without venturing to address anybody in particular.
They were all passing out of the precincts of the hermitage
at the moment.
</p>

<p>
<q>I can't answer for a madhouse and for madmen,</q> Miüsov answered
at once ill-humoredly, <q>but I will spare myself your company,
Fyodor Pavlovitch, and, trust me, for ever. Where's that
monk?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>That monk,</q> that is, the monk who had invited them to dine
with the Superior, did not keep them waiting. He met them as
soon as they came down the steps from the elder's cell, as though
he had been waiting for them all the time.
</p>

<p>
<q>Reverend Father, kindly do me a favor. Convey my deepest
respect to the Father Superior, apologize for me, personally, Miüsov,
to his reverence, telling him that I deeply regret that owing to unforeseen
circumstances I am unable to have the honor of being
present at his table, greatly as I should desire to do so,</q> Miüsov
said irritably to the monk.
</p>

<p>
<q>And that unforeseen circumstance, of course, is myself,</q> Fyodor
Pavlovitch cut in immediately. <q>Do you hear, Father; this gentleman
doesn't want to remain in my company or else he'd come at
once. And you shall go, Pyotr Alexandrovitch, pray go to the
Father Superior and good appetite to you. I will decline, and not
you. Home, home, I'll eat at home, I don't feel equal to it here,
Pyotr Alexandrovitch, my amiable relative.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I am not your relative and never have been, you contemptible
man!</q>
</p>

<pb n='078'/><anchor id='Pg078'/>

<p>
<q>I said it on purpose to madden you, because you always disclaim
the relationship, though you really are a relation in spite of your
shuffling. I'll prove it by the church calendar. As for you, Ivan,
stay if you like. I'll send the horses for you later. Propriety requires
you to go to the Father Superior, Pyotr Alexandrovitch, to
apologize for the disturbance we've been making....</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Is it true that you are going home? Aren't you lying?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Pyotr Alexandrovitch! How could I dare after what's happened!
Forgive me, gentlemen, I was carried away! And upset
besides! And, indeed, I am ashamed. Gentlemen, one man has
the heart of Alexander of Macedon and another the heart of the
little dog Fido. Mine is that of the little dog Fido. I am ashamed!
After such an escapade how can I go to dinner, to gobble up the
monastery's sauces? I am ashamed, I can't. You must excuse
me!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>The devil only knows, what if he deceives us?</q> thought Miüsov,
still hesitating, and watching the retreating buffoon with distrustful
eyes. The latter turned round, and noticing that Miüsov was
watching him, waved him a kiss.
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, are you coming to the Superior?</q> Miüsov asked Ivan
abruptly.
</p>

<p>
<q>Why not? I was especially invited yesterday.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Unfortunately I feel myself compelled to go to this confounded
dinner,</q> said Miüsov with the same irritability, regardless of the
fact that the monk was listening. <q>We ought, at least, to apologize
for the disturbance, and explain that it was not our doing. What
do you think?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, we must explain that it wasn't our doing. Besides, father
won't be there,</q> observed Ivan.
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, I should hope not! Confound this dinner!</q>
</p>

<p>
They all walked on, however. The monk listened in silence. On
the road through the copse he made one observation however&mdash;that
the Father Superior had been waiting a long time, and that they
were more than half an hour late. He received no answer. Miüsov
looked with hatred at Ivan.
</p>

<p>
<q>Here he is, going to the dinner as though nothing had happened,</q>
he thought. <q>A brazen face, and the conscience of a
Karamazov!</q>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='079'/><anchor id='Pg079'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VII. A Young Man Bent On A Career</head>

<p>
Alyosha helped Father Zossima to his bedroom and seated
him on his bed. It was a little room furnished with the bare
necessities. There was a narrow iron bedstead, with a strip of felt
for a mattress. In the corner, under the ikons, was a reading-desk
with a cross and the Gospel lying on it. The elder sank exhausted
on the bed. His eyes glittered and he breathed hard. He looked
intently at Alyosha, as though considering something.
</p>

<p>
<q>Go, my dear boy, go. Porfiry is enough for me. Make haste,
you are needed there, go and wait at the Father Superior's table.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Let me stay here,</q> Alyosha entreated.
</p>

<p>
<q>You are more needed there. There is no peace there. You will
wait, and be of service. If evil spirits rise up, repeat a prayer. And
remember, my son</q>&mdash;the elder liked to call him that&mdash;<q>this is not the
place for you in the future. When it is God's will to call me, leave
the monastery. Go away for good.</q>
</p>

<p>
Alyosha started.
</p>

<p>
<q>What is it? This is not your place for the time. I bless you
for great service in the world. Yours will be a long pilgrimage.
And you will have to take a wife, too. You will have to bear <emph>all</emph>
before you come back. There will be much to do. But I don't
doubt of you, and so I send you forth. Christ is with you. Do not
abandon Him and He will not abandon you. You will see great
sorrow, and in that sorrow you will be happy. This is my last
message to you: in sorrow seek happiness. Work, work unceasingly.
Remember my words, for although I shall talk with you again, not
only my days but my hours are numbered.</q>
</p>

<p>
Alyosha's face again betrayed strong emotion. The corners of his
mouth quivered.
</p>

<p>
<q>What is it again?</q> Father Zossima asked, smiling gently. <q>The
worldly may follow the dead with tears, but here we rejoice over the
father who is departing. We rejoice and pray for him. Leave me,
I must pray. Go, and make haste. Be near your brothers. And
not near one only, but near both.</q>
</p>

<pb n='080'/><anchor id='Pg080'/>

<p>
Father Zossima raised his hand to bless him. Alyosha could make
no protest, though he had a great longing to remain. He longed,
moreover, to ask the significance of his bowing to Dmitri, the question
was on the tip of his tongue, but he dared not ask it. He
knew that the elder would have explained it unasked if he had
thought fit. But evidently it was not his will. That action had
made a terrible impression on Alyosha; he believed blindly in its
mysterious significance. Mysterious, and perhaps awful.
</p>

<p>
As he hastened out of the hermitage precincts to reach the
monastery in time to serve at the Father Superior's dinner, he felt a
sudden pang at his heart, and stopped short. He seemed to hear
again Father Zossima's words, foretelling his approaching end. What
he had foretold so exactly must infallibly come to pass. Alyosha
believed that implicitly. But how could he be left without him?
How could he live without seeing and hearing him? Where should
he go? He had told him not to weep, and to leave the monastery.
Good God! It was long since Alyosha had known such anguish.
He hurried through the copse that divided the monastery from the
hermitage, and unable to bear the burden of his thoughts, he gazed
at the ancient pines beside the path. He had not far to go&mdash;about
five hundred paces. He expected to meet no one at that hour, but
at the first turn of the path he noticed Rakitin. He was waiting
for some one.
</p>

<p>
<q>Are you waiting for me?</q> asked Alyosha, overtaking him.
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes,</q> grinned Rakitin. <q>You are hurrying to the Father Superior,
I know; he has a banquet. There's not been such a banquet
since the Superior entertained the Bishop and General Pahatov, do you
remember? I shan't be there, but you go and hand the sauces. Tell
me one thing, Alexey, what does that vision mean? That's what I
want to ask you.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What vision?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>That bowing to your brother, Dmitri. And didn't he tap the
ground with his forehead, too!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>You speak of Father Zossima?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Yes, of Father Zossima.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Tapped the ground?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ah, an irreverent expression! Well, what of it? Anyway, what
does that vision mean?</q>
</p>

<pb n='081'/><anchor id='Pg081'/>

<p>
<q>I don't know what it means, Misha.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I knew he wouldn't explain it to you! There's nothing wonderful
about it, of course, only the usual holy mummery. But there
was an object in the performance. All the pious people in the town
will talk about it and spread the story through the province, wondering
what it meant. To my thinking the old man really has a
keen nose; he sniffed a crime. Your house stinks of it.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What crime?</q>
</p>

<p>
Rakitin evidently had something he was eager to speak of.
</p>

<p>
<q>It'll be in your family, this crime. Between your brothers and
your rich old father. So Father Zossima flopped down to be ready
for what may turn up. If something happens later on, it'll be:
<q>Ah, the holy man foresaw it, prophesied it!</q> though it's a poor sort
of prophecy, flopping like that. <q>Ah, but it was symbolic,</q> they'll
say, <q>an allegory,</q> and the devil knows what all! It'll be remembered
to his glory: <q>He predicted the crime and marked the criminal!</q>
That's always the way with these crazy fanatics; they cross
themselves at the tavern and throw stones at the temple. Like
your elder, he takes a stick to a just man and falls at the feet of a
murderer.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What crime? What murderer? What do you mean?</q>
</p>

<p>
Alyosha stopped dead. Rakitin stopped, too.
</p>

<p>
<q>What murderer? As though you didn't know! I'll bet you've
thought of it before. That's interesting, too, by the way. Listen,
Alyosha, you always speak the truth, though you're always between
two stools. Have you thought of it or not? Answer.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I have,</q> answered Alyosha in a low voice. Even Rakitin was
taken aback.
</p>

<p>
<q>What? Have you really?</q> he cried.
</p>

<p>
<q>I ... I've not exactly thought it,</q> muttered Alyosha, <q>but
directly you began speaking so strangely, I fancied I had thought
of it myself.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>You see? (And how well you expressed it!) Looking at your
father and your brother Mitya to-day you thought of a crime.
Then I'm not mistaken?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But wait, wait a minute,</q> Alyosha broke in uneasily. <q>What
has led you to see all this? Why does it interest you? That's the
first question.</q>
</p>

<pb n='082'/><anchor id='Pg082'/>

<p>
<q>Two questions, disconnected, but natural. I'll deal with them
separately. What led me to see it? I shouldn't have seen it, if I
hadn't suddenly understood your brother Dmitri, seen right into the
very heart of him all at once. I caught the whole man from one
trait. These very honest but passionate people have a line which
mustn't be crossed. If it were, he'd run at your father with a
knife. But your father's a drunken and abandoned old sinner, who
can never draw the line&mdash;if they both let themselves go, they'll
both come to grief.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>No, Misha, no. If that's all, you've reassured me. It won't
come to that.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But why are you trembling? Let me tell you; he may be honest,
our Mitya (he is stupid, but honest), but he's&mdash;a sensualist. That's
the very definition and inner essence of him. It's your father has
handed him on his low sensuality. Do you know, I simply wonder
at you, Alyosha, how you can have kept your purity. You're a
Karamazov too, you know! In your family sensuality is carried to
a disease. But now, these three sensualists are watching one another,
with their knives in their belts. The three of them are
knocking their heads together, and you may be the fourth.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>You are mistaken about that woman. Dmitri&mdash;despises her,</q>
said Alyosha, with a sort of shudder.
</p>

<p>
<q>Grushenka? No, brother, he doesn't despise her. Since he has
openly abandoned his betrothed for her, he doesn't despise her.
There's something here, my dear boy, that you don't understand
yet. A man will fall in love with some beauty, with a woman's
body, or even with a part of a woman's body (a sensualist can understand
that), and he'll abandon his own children for her, sell his
father and mother, and his country, Russia, too. If he's honest,
he'll steal; if he's humane, he'll murder; if he's faithful, he'll deceive.
Pushkin, the poet of women's feet, sung of their feet in his verse.
Others don't sing their praises, but they can't look at their feet
without a thrill&mdash;and it's not only their feet. Contempt's no help
here, brother, even if he did despise Grushenka. He does, but he
can't tear himself away.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I understand that,</q> Alyosha jerked out suddenly.
</p>

<p>
<q>Really? Well, I dare say you do understand, since you blurt it
out at the first word,</q> said Rakitin, malignantly. <q>That escaped
<pb n='083'/><anchor id='Pg083'/>
you unawares, and the confession's the more precious. So it's a
familiar subject; you've thought about it already, about sensuality,
I mean! Oh, you virgin soul! You're a quiet one, Alyosha, you're
a saint, I know, but the devil only knows what you've thought
about, and what you know already! You are pure, but you've been
down into the depths.... I've been watching you a long time.
You're a Karamazov yourself; you're a thorough Karamazov&mdash;no
doubt birth and selection have something to answer for. You're a
sensualist from your father, a crazy saint from your mother. Why
do you tremble? Is it true, then? Do you know, Grushenka has
been begging me to bring you along. <q>I'll pull off his cassock,</q> she
says. You can't think how she keeps begging me to bring you. I
wondered why she took such an interest in you. Do you know,
she's an extraordinary woman, too!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Thank her and say I'm not coming,</q> said Alyosha, with a
strained smile. <q>Finish what you were saying, Misha. I'll tell you
my idea after.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>There's nothing to finish. It's all clear. It's the same old tune,
brother. If even you are a sensualist at heart, what of your brother,
Ivan? He's a Karamazov, too. What is at the root of all you
Karamazovs is that you're all sensual, grasping and crazy! Your
brother Ivan writes theological articles in joke, for some idiotic, unknown
motive of his own, though he's an atheist, and he admits it's
a fraud himself&mdash;that's your brother Ivan. He's trying to get
Mitya's betrothed for himself, and I fancy he'll succeed, too. And
what's more, it's with Mitya's consent. For Mitya will surrender
his betrothed to him to be rid of her, and escape to Grushenka.
And he's ready to do that in spite of all his nobility and disinterestedness.
Observe that. Those are the most fatal people! Who the
devil can make you out? He recognizes his vileness and goes on
with it! Let me tell you, too, the old man, your father, is standing
in Mitya's way now. He has suddenly gone crazy over Grushenka.
His mouth waters at the sight of her. It's simply on her account
he made that scene in the cell just now, simply because Miüsov
called her an <q>abandoned creature.</q> He's worse than a tom-cat in
love. At first she was only employed by him in connection with
his taverns and in some other shady business, but now he has suddenly
realized all she is and has gone wild about her. He keeps
<pb n='084'/><anchor id='Pg084'/>
pestering her with his offers, not honorable ones, of course. And
they'll come into collision, the precious father and son, on that path!
But Grushenka favors neither of them, she's still playing with them,
and teasing them both, considering which she can get most out of.
For though she could filch a lot of money from the papa he wouldn't
marry her, and maybe he'll turn stingy in the end, and keep his
purse shut. That's where Mitya's value comes in; he has no money,
but he's ready to marry her. Yes, ready to marry her! to abandon
his betrothed, a rare beauty, Katerina Ivanovna, who's rich, and
the daughter of a colonel, and to marry Grushenka, who has been
the mistress of a dissolute old merchant, Samsonov, a coarse, uneducated,
provincial mayor. Some murderous conflict may well
come to pass from all this, and that's what your brother Ivan is
waiting for. It would suit him down to the ground. He'll carry
off Katerina Ivanovna, for whom he is languishing, and pocket her
dowry of sixty thousand. That's very alluring to start with, for a
man of no consequence and a beggar. And, take note, he won't
be wronging Mitya, but doing him the greatest service. For I know
as a fact that Mitya only last week, when he was with some gypsy
girls drunk in a tavern, cried out aloud that he was unworthy of
his betrothed, Katya, but that his brother Ivan, he was the man
who deserved her. And Katerina Ivanovna will not in the end
refuse such a fascinating man as Ivan. She's hesitating between
the two of them already. And how has that Ivan won you all, so
that you all worship him? He is laughing at you, and enjoying
himself at your expense.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>How do you know? How can you speak so confidently?</q>
Alyosha asked sharply, frowning.
</p>

<p>
<q>Why do you ask, and are frightened at my answer? It shows
that you know I'm speaking the truth.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>You don't like Ivan. Ivan wouldn't be tempted by money.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Really? And the beauty of Katerina Ivanovna? It's not only
the money, though a fortune of sixty thousand is an attraction.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ivan is above that. He wouldn't make up to any one for
thousands. It is not money, it's not comfort Ivan is seeking. Perhaps
it's suffering he is seeking.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What wild dream now? Oh, you&mdash;aristocrats!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ah, Misha, he has a stormy spirit. His mind is in bondage.
<pb n='085'/><anchor id='Pg085'/>
He is haunted by a great, unsolved doubt. He is one of those who
don't want millions, but an answer to their questions.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>That's plagiarism, Alyosha. You're quoting your elder's phrases.
Ah, Ivan has set you a problem!</q> cried Rakitin, with undisguised
malice. His face changed, and his lips twitched. <q>And the problem's
a stupid one. It is no good guessing it. Rack your brains&mdash;you'll
understand it. His article is absurd and ridiculous. And did
you hear his stupid theory just now: if there's no immortality of
the soul, then there's no virtue, and everything is lawful. (And
by the way, do you remember how your brother Mitya cried out:
<q>I will remember!</q>) An attractive theory for scoundrels!&mdash;(I'm
being abusive, that's stupid.) Not for scoundrels, but for pedantic
<foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>poseurs</foreign>, <q>haunted by profound,
unsolved doubts.</q> He's showing off,
and what it all comes to is, <q>on the one hand we cannot but admit</q>
and <q>on the other it must be confessed!</q> His whole theory is a
fraud! Humanity will find in itself the power to live for virtue
even without believing in immortality. It will find it in love for
freedom, for equality, for fraternity.</q>
</p>

<p>
Rakitin could hardly restrain himself in his heat, but, suddenly, as
though remembering something, he stopped short.
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, that's enough,</q> he said, with a still more crooked smile.
<q>Why are you laughing? Do you think I'm a vulgar fool?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>No, I never dreamed of thinking you a vulgar fool. You are
clever but ... never mind, I was silly to smile. I understand your
getting hot about it, Misha. I guess from your warmth that you
are not indifferent to Katerina Ivanovna yourself; I've suspected that
for a long time, brother, that's why you don't like my brother Ivan.
Are you jealous of him?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>And jealous of her money, too? Won't you add that?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I'll say nothing about money. I am not going to insult you.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I believe it, since you say so, but confound you, and your brother
Ivan with you. Don't you understand that one might very well
dislike him, apart from Katerina Ivanovna. And why the devil
should I like him? He condescends to abuse me, you know. Why
haven't I a right to abuse him?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I never heard of his saying anything about you, good or bad.
He doesn't speak of you at all.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But I heard that the day before yesterday at Katerina Ivanovna's
<pb n='086'/><anchor id='Pg086'/>
he was abusing me for all he was worth&mdash;you see what an interest
he takes in your humble servant. And which is the jealous one
after that, brother, I can't say. He was so good as to express the
opinion that, if I don't go in for the career of an archimandrite in
the immediate future and don't become a monk, I shall be sure to
go to Petersburg and get on to some solid magazine as a reviewer,
that I shall write for the next ten years, and in the end become the
owner of the magazine, and bring it out on the liberal and atheistic
side, with a socialistic tinge, with a tiny gloss of socialism, but keeping
a sharp look out all the time, that is, keeping in with both sides
and hoodwinking the fools. According to your brother's account,
the tinge of socialism won't hinder me from laying by the proceeds
and investing them under the guidance of some Jew, till at the end
of my career I build a great house in Petersburg and move my publishing
offices to it, and let out the upper stories to lodgers. He has
even chosen the place for it, near the new stone bridge across the
Neva, which they say is to be built in Petersburg.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Ah, Misha, that's just what will really happen, every word of
it,</q> cried Alyosha, unable to restrain a good-humored smile.
</p>

<p>
<q>You are pleased to be sarcastic, too, Alexey Fyodorovitch.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>No, no, I'm joking, forgive me. I've something quite different
in my mind. But, excuse me, who can have told you all this? You
can't have been at Katerina Ivanovna's yourself when he was talking
about you?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I wasn't there, but Dmitri Fyodorovitch was; and I heard him
tell it with my own ears; if you want to know, he didn't tell me, but
I overheard him, unintentionally, of course, for I was sitting in
Grushenka's bedroom and I couldn't go away because Dmitri Fyodorovitch
was in the next room.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Oh, yes, I'd forgotten she was a relation of yours.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>A relation! That Grushenka a relation of mine!</q> cried Rakitin,
turning crimson. <q>Are you mad? You're out of your mind!</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Why, isn't she a relation of yours? I heard so.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Where can you have heard it? You Karamazovs brag of being
an ancient, noble family, though your father used to run about
playing the buffoon at other men's tables, and was only admitted to
the kitchen as a favor. I may be only a priest's son, and dirt in
the eyes of noblemen like you, but don't insult me so lightly and
<pb n='087'/><anchor id='Pg087'/>
wantonly. I have a sense of honor, too, Alexey Fyodorovitch, I
couldn't be a relation of Grushenka, a common harlot. I beg you
to understand that!</q>
</p>

<p>
Rakitin was intensely irritated.
</p>

<p>
<q>Forgive me, for goodness' sake, I had no idea ... besides ...
how can you call her a harlot? Is she ... that sort of woman?</q>
Alyosha flushed suddenly. <q>I tell you again, I heard that she was a
relation of yours. You often go to see her, and you told me yourself
you're not her lover. I never dreamed that you of all people
had such contempt for her! Does she really deserve it?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>I may have reasons of my own for visiting her. That's not your
business. But as for relationship, your brother, or even your father,
is more likely to make her yours than mine. Well, here we are.
You'd better go to the kitchen. Hullo! what's wrong, what is it?
Are we late? They can't have finished dinner so soon! Have the
Karamazovs been making trouble again? No doubt they have.
Here's your father and your brother Ivan after him. They've
broken out from the Father Superior's. And look, Father Isidor's
shouting out something after them from the steps. And your
father's shouting and waving his arms. I expect he's swearing.
Bah, and there goes Miüsov driving away in his carriage. You see,
he's going. And there's old Maximov running!&mdash;there must have
been a row. There can't have been any dinner. Surely they've not
been beating the Father Superior! Or have they, perhaps, been
beaten? It would serve them right!</q>
</p>

<p>
There was reason for Rakitin's exclamations. There had been a
scandalous, an unprecedented scene. It had all come from the impulse
of a moment.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VIII. The Scandalous Scene</head>

<p>
Miüsov, as a man of breeding and delicacy, could not but
feel some inward qualms, when he reached the Father Superior's
with Ivan: he felt ashamed of having lost his temper. He felt
that he ought to have disdained that despicable wretch, Fyodor
<pb n='088'/><anchor id='Pg088'/>
Pavlovitch, too much to have been upset by him in Father Zossima's
cell, and so to have forgotten himself. <q>The monks were not to
blame, in any case,</q> he reflected, on the steps. <q>And if they're
decent people here (and the Father Superior, I understand, is a
nobleman) why not be friendly and courteous with them? I won't
argue, I'll fall in with everything, I'll win them by politeness, and ... and ... show
them that I've nothing to do with that Æsop,
that buffoon, that Pierrot, and have merely been taken in over this
affair, just as they have.</q>
</p>

<p>
He determined to drop his litigation with the monastery, and
relinquish his claims to the wood-cutting and fishery rights at once.
He was the more ready to do this because the rights had become
much less valuable, and he had indeed the vaguest idea where the
wood and river in question were.
</p>

<p>
These excellent intentions were strengthened when he entered the
Father Superior's dining-room, though, strictly speaking, it was not
a dining-room, for the Father Superior had only two rooms altogether;
they were, however, much larger and more comfortable than
Father Zossima's. But there was no great luxury about the furnishing
of these rooms either. The furniture was of mahogany, covered
with leather, in the old-fashioned style of 1820; the floor was not
even stained, but everything was shining with cleanliness, and there
were many choice flowers in the windows; the most sumptuous
thing in the room at the moment was, of course, the beautifully
decorated table. The cloth was clean, the service shone; there were
three kinds of well-baked bread, two bottles of wine, two of excellent
mead, and a large glass jug of kvas&mdash;both the latter made in
the monastery, and famous in the neighborhood. There was no
vodka. Rakitin related afterwards that there were five dishes: fish-soup
made of sterlets, served with little fish patties; then boiled fish
served in a special way; then salmon cutlets, ice pudding and compote,
and finally, blanc-mange. Rakitin found out about all these
good things, for he could not resist peeping into the kitchen, where
he already had a footing. He had a footing everywhere, and got
information about everything. He was of an uneasy and envious
temper. He was well aware of his own considerable abilities, and
nervously exaggerated them in his self-conceit. He knew he would
play a prominent part of some sort, but Alyosha, who was attached
<pb n='089'/><anchor id='Pg089'/>
to him, was distressed to see that his friend Rakitin was dishonorable,
and quite unconscious of being so himself, considering, on the
contrary, that because he would not steal money left on the table
he was a man of the highest integrity. Neither Alyosha nor any
one else could have influenced him in that.
</p>

<p>
Rakitin, of course, was a person of too little consequence to be
invited to the dinner, to which Father Iosif, Father Païssy, and one
other monk were the only inmates of the monastery invited. They
were already waiting when Miüsov, Kalganov, and Ivan arrived.
The other guest, Maximov, stood a little aside, waiting also. The
Father Superior stepped into the middle of the room to receive his
guests. He was a tall, thin, but still vigorous old man, with black
hair streaked with gray, and a long, grave, ascetic face. He bowed
to his guests in silence. But this time they approached to receive
his blessing. Miüsov even tried to kiss his hand, but the Father
Superior drew it back in time to avoid the salute. But Ivan and
Kalganov went through the ceremony in the most simple-hearted
and complete manner, kissing his hand as peasants do.
</p>

<p>
<q>We must apologize most humbly, your reverence,</q> began Miüsov,
simpering affably, and speaking in a dignified and respectful tone.
<q>Pardon us for having come alone without the gentleman you invited,
Fyodor Pavlovitch. He felt obliged to decline the honor
of your hospitality, and not without reason. In the reverend Father
Zossima's cell he was carried away by the unhappy dissension with
his son, and let fall words which were quite out of keeping ...
in fact, quite unseemly ... as</q>&mdash;he glanced at the monks&mdash;<q>your
reverence is, no doubt, already aware. And therefore, recognizing
that he had been to blame, he felt sincere regret and shame, and
begged me, and his son Ivan Fyodorovitch, to convey to you his
apologies and regrets. In brief, he hopes and desires to make amends
later. He asks your blessing, and begs you to forget what has taken
place.</q>
</p>

<p>
As he uttered the last word of his tirade, Miüsov completely recovered
his self-complacency, and all traces of his former irritation
disappeared. He fully and sincerely loved humanity again.
</p>

<p>
The Father Superior listened to him with dignity, and, with a
slight bend of the head, replied:
</p>

<pb n='090'/><anchor id='Pg090'/>

<p>
<q>I sincerely deplore his absence. Perhaps at our table he might
have learnt to like us, and we him. Pray be seated, gentlemen.</q>
</p>

<p>
He stood before the holy image, and began to say grace, aloud.
All bent their heads reverently, and Maximov clasped his hands before
him, with peculiar fervor.
</p>

<p>
It was at this moment that Fyodor Pavlovitch played his last
prank. It must be noted that he really had meant to go home, and
really had felt the impossibility of going to dine with the Father
Superior as though nothing had happened, after his disgraceful behavior
in the elder's cell. Not that he was so very much ashamed
of himself&mdash;quite the contrary perhaps. But still he felt it would
be unseemly to go to dinner. Yet his creaking carriage had hardly
been brought to the steps of the hotel, and he had hardly got into it,
when he suddenly stopped short. He remembered his own words
at the elder's: <q>I always feel when I meet people that I am lower
than all, and that they all take me for a buffoon; so I say let me play
the buffoon, for you are, every one of you, stupider and lower than
I.</q> He longed to revenge himself on every one for his own unseemliness.
He suddenly recalled how he had once in the past been
asked, <q>Why do you hate so and so, so much?</q> And he had answered
them, with his shameless impudence, <q>I'll tell you. He has
done me no harm. But I played him a dirty trick, and ever since
I have hated him.</q>
</p>

<p>
Remembering that now, he smiled quietly and malignantly, hesitating
for a moment. His eyes gleamed, and his lips positively
quivered. <q>Well, since I have begun, I may as well go on,</q> he
decided. His predominant sensation at that moment might be expressed
in the following words, <q>Well, there is no rehabilitating
myself now. So let me shame them for all I am worth. I will
show them I don't care what they think&mdash;that's all!</q>
</p>

<p>
He told the coachman to wait, while with rapid steps he returned
to the monastery and straight to the Father Superior's. He had no
clear idea what he would do, but he knew that he could not control
himself, and that a touch might drive him to the utmost limits of
obscenity, but only to obscenity, to nothing criminal, nothing for
which he could be legally punished. In the last resort, he could
always restrain himself, and had marveled indeed at himself, on that
score, sometimes. He appeared in the Father Superior's dining-room,
<pb n='091'/><anchor id='Pg091'/>
at the moment when the prayer was over, and all were moving
to the table. Standing in the doorway, he scanned the company,
and laughing his prolonged, impudent, malicious chuckle, looked
them all boldly in the face. <q>They thought I had gone, and here
I am again,</q> he cried to the whole room.
</p>

<p>
For one moment every one stared at him without a word; and at
once every one felt that something revolting, grotesque, positively
scandalous, was about to happen. Miüsov passed immediately from
the most benevolent frame of mind to the most savage. All the
feelings that had subsided and died down in his heart revived instantly.
</p>

<p>
<q>No! this I cannot endure!</q> he cried. <q>I absolutely cannot! and ...
I certainly cannot!</q>
</p>

<p>
The blood rushed to his head. He positively stammered; but he
was beyond thinking of style, and he seized his hat.
</p>

<p>
<q>What is it he cannot?</q> cried Fyodor Pavlovitch, <q>that he absolutely
cannot and certainly cannot? Your reverence, am I to come
in or not? Will you receive me as your guest?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>You are welcome with all my heart,</q> answered the Superior.
<q>Gentlemen!</q> he added, <q>I venture to beg you most earnestly to
lay aside your dissensions, and to be united in love and family
harmony&mdash;with prayer to the Lord at our humble table.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>No, no, it is impossible!</q> cried Miüsov, beside himself.
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, if it is impossible for Pyotr Alexandrovitch, it is impossible
for me, and I won't stop. That is why I came. I will keep
with Pyotr Alexandrovitch everywhere now. If you will go away,
Pyotr Alexandrovitch, I will go away too, if you remain, I will remain.
You stung him by what you said about family harmony,
Father Superior, he does not admit he is my relation. That's right,
isn't it, von Sohn? Here's von Sohn. How are you, von Sohn?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Do you mean me?</q> muttered Maximov, puzzled.
</p>

<p>
<q>Of course I mean you,</q> cried Fyodor Pavlovitch. <q>Who else?
The Father Superior could not be von Sohn.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>But I am not von Sohn either. I am Maximov.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>No, you are von Sohn. Your reverence, do you know who von
Sohn was? It was a famous murder case. He was killed in a house
of harlotry&mdash;I believe that is what such places are called among
you&mdash;he was killed and robbed, and in spite of his venerable age, he
<pb n='092'/><anchor id='Pg092'/>
was nailed up in a box and sent from Petersburg to Moscow in the
luggage van, and while they were nailing him up, the harlots sang
songs and played the harp, that is to say, the piano. So this is that
very von Sohn. He has risen from the dead, hasn't he, von Sohn?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>What is happening? What's this?</q> voices were heard in the
group of monks.
</p>

<p>
<q>Let us go,</q> cried Miüsov, addressing Kalganov.
</p>

<p>
<q>No, excuse me,</q> Fyodor Pavlovitch broke in shrilly, taking another
step into the room. <q>Allow me to finish. There in the cell
you blamed me for behaving disrespectfully just because I spoke of
eating gudgeon, Pyotr Alexandrovitch. Miüsov, my relation, prefers
to have <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>plus de noblesse que de sincérité</foreign>
in his words, but I prefer in mine <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>plus de
sincérité que de noblesse</foreign>, and&mdash;damn the
<foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>noblesse</foreign>!
That's right, isn't it, von Sohn? Allow me, Father Superior, though
I am a buffoon and play the buffoon, yet I am the soul of honor,
and I want to speak my mind. Yes, I am the soul of honor, while in
Pyotr Alexandrovitch there is wounded vanity and nothing else.
I came here perhaps to have a look and speak my mind. My son,
Alexey, is here, being saved. I am his father; I care for his welfare,
and it is my duty to care. While I've been playing the fool, I have
been listening and having a look on the sly; and now I want to give
you the last act of the performance. You know how things are
with us? As a thing falls, so it lies. As a thing once has fallen, so
it must lie for ever. Not a bit of it! I want to get up again.
Holy Father, I am indignant with you. Confession is a great
sacrament, before which I am ready to bow down reverently; but
there in the cell, they all kneel down and confess aloud. Can it be
right to confess aloud? It was ordained by the holy Fathers to
confess in secret: then only your confession will be a mystery, and
so it was of old. But how can I explain to him before every one
that I did this and that ... well, you understand what&mdash;sometimes
it would not be proper to talk about it&mdash;so it is really a scandal!
No, Fathers, one might be carried along with you to the Flagellants,
I dare say ... at the first opportunity I shall write to the Synod,
and I shall take my son, Alexey, home.</q>
</p>

<p>
We must note here that Fyodor Pavlovitch knew where to look
for the weak spot. There had been at one time malicious rumors
which had even reached the Archbishop (not only regarding our
<pb n='093'/><anchor id='Pg093'/>
monastery, but in others where the institution of elders existed)
that too much respect was paid to the elders, even to the detriment
of the authority of the Superior, that the elders abused the sacrament
of confession and so on and so on&mdash;absurd charges which had died
away of themselves everywhere. But the spirit of folly, which had
caught up Fyodor Pavlovitch, and was bearing him on the current
of his own nerves into lower and lower depths of ignominy,
prompted him with this old slander. Fyodor Pavlovitch did not
understand a word of it, and he could not even put it sensibly, for
on this occasion no one had been kneeling and confessing aloud in
the elder's cell, so that he could not have seen anything of the kind.
He was only speaking from confused memory of old slanders. But
as soon as he had uttered his foolish tirade, he felt he had been talking
absurd nonsense, and at once longed to prove to his audience,
and above all to himself, that he had not been talking nonsense.
And, though he knew perfectly well that with each word he would
be adding more and more absurdity, he could not restrain himself,
and plunged forward blindly.
</p>

<p>
<q>How disgraceful!</q> cried Pyotr Alexandrovitch.
</p>

<p>
<q>Pardon me!</q> said the Father Superior. <q>It was said of old,
<q>Many have begun to speak against me and have uttered evil
sayings about me. And hearing it I have said to myself: it is the
correction of the Lord and He has sent it to heal my vain soul.</q>
And so we humbly thank you, honored guest!</q> and he made Fyodor
Pavlovitch a low bow.
</p>

<p>
<q>Tut&mdash;tut&mdash;tut&mdash;sanctimoniousness and stock phrases! Old
phrases and old gestures. The old lies and formal prostrations. We
know all about them. A kiss on the lips and a dagger in the heart,
as in Schiller's <hi rend='italic'>Robbers</hi>. I don't like falsehood, Fathers, I want
the truth. But the truth is not to be found in eating gudgeon and that
I proclaim aloud! Father monks, why do you fast? Why do you
expect reward in heaven for that? Why, for reward like that I will
come and fast too! No, saintly monk, you try being virtuous in
the world, do good to society, without shutting yourself up in a
monastery at other people's expense, and without expecting a reward
up aloft for it&mdash;you'll find that a bit harder. I can talk sense, too,
Father Superior. What have they got here?</q> He went up to the
table. <q>Old port wine, mead brewed by the Eliseyev Brothers. Fie,
<pb n='094'/><anchor id='Pg094'/>
fie, fathers! That is something beyond gudgeon. Look at the
bottles the fathers have brought out, he he he! And who has provided
it all? The Russian peasant, the laborer, brings here the farthing
earned by his horny hand, wringing it from his family and the
tax-gatherer! You bleed the people, you know, holy fathers.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>This is too disgraceful!</q> said Father Iosif.
</p>

<p>
Father Païssy kept obstinately silent. Miüsov rushed from the
room, and Kalganov after him.
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, Father, I will follow Pyotr Alexandrovitch! I am not
coming to see you again. You may beg me on your knees, I shan't
come. I sent you a thousand roubles, so you have begun to keep
your eye on me. He he he! No, I'll say no more. I am taking my
revenge for my youth, for all the humiliation I endured.</q> He
thumped the table with his fist in a paroxysm of simulated feeling.
<q>This monastery has played a great part in my life! It has cost
me many bitter tears. You used to set my wife, the crazy one,
against me. You cursed me with bell and book, you spread stories
about me all over the place. Enough, fathers! This is the age of
Liberalism, the age of steamers and railways. Neither a thousand,
nor a hundred roubles, no, nor a hundred farthings will you get
out of me!</q>
</p>

<p>
It must be noted again that our monastery never had played any
great part in his life, and he never had shed a bitter tear owing to it.
But he was so carried away by his simulated emotion, that he was
for one moment almost believing it himself. He was so touched he
was almost weeping. But at that very instant, he felt that it was
time to draw back.
</p>

<p>
The Father Superior bowed his head at his malicious lie, and again
spoke impressively:
</p>

<p>
<q>It is written again, <q>Bear circumspectly and gladly dishonor
that cometh upon thee by no act of thine own, be not confounded
and hate not him who hath dishonored thee.</q> And so will we.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Tut, tut, tut! Bethinking thyself and the rest of the rigmarole.
Bethink yourselves, Fathers, I will go. But I will take my son,
Alexey, away from here for ever, on my parental authority. Ivan
Fyodorovitch, my most dutiful son, permit me to order you to
follow me. Von Sohn, what have you to stay for? Come and see
me now in the town. It is fun there. It is only one short verst;
<pb n='095'/><anchor id='Pg095'/>
instead of lenten oil, I will give you sucking-pig and kasha. We
will have dinner with some brandy and liqueur to it.... I've
cloudberry wine. Hey, von Sohn, don't lose your chance.</q> He
went out, shouting and gesticulating.
</p>

<p>
It was at that moment Rakitin saw him and pointed him out to
Alyosha.
</p>

<p>
<q>Alexey!</q> his father shouted, from far off, catching sight of him.
<q>You come home to me to-day, for good, and bring your pillow
and mattress, and leave no trace behind.</q>
</p>

<p>
Alyosha stood rooted to the spot, watching the scene in silence.
Meanwhile, Fyodor Pavlovitch had got into the carriage, and Ivan
was about to follow him in grim silence without even turning to
say good-by to Alyosha. But at this point another almost incredible
scene of grotesque buffoonery gave the finishing touch to the episode.
Maximov suddenly appeared by the side of the carriage. He ran
up, panting, afraid of being too late. Rakitin and Alyosha saw
him running. He was in such a hurry that in his impatience he put
his foot on the step on which Ivan's left foot was still resting, and
clutching the carriage he kept trying to jump in. <q>I am going
with you!</q> he kept shouting, laughing a thin mirthful laugh with a
look of reckless glee in his face. <q>Take me, too.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>There!</q> cried Fyodor Pavlovitch, delighted. <q>Did I not say he
was von Sohn. It is von Sohn himself, risen from the dead. Why,
how did you tear yourself away? What did you <hi rend='italic'>vonsohn</hi> there?
And how could you get away from the dinner? You must be a
brazen-faced fellow! I am that myself, but I am surprised at you,
brother! Jump in, jump in! Let him pass, Ivan. It will be fun.
He can lie somewhere at our feet. Will you lie at our feet, von
Sohn? Or perch on the box with the coachman. Skip on to the
box, von Sohn!</q>
</p>

<p>
But Ivan, who had by now taken his seat, without a word gave
Maximov a violent punch in the breast and sent him flying. It was
quite by chance he did not fall.
</p>

<p>
<q>Drive on!</q> Ivan shouted angrily to the coachman.
</p>

<p>
<q>Why, what are you doing, what are you about? Why did you
do that?</q> Fyodor Pavlovitch protested.
</p>

<p>
But the carriage had already driven away. Ivan made no reply.
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, you are a fellow,</q> Fyodor Pavlovitch said again.
</p>

<pb n='096'/><anchor id='Pg096'/>

<p>
After a pause of two minutes, looking askance at his son, <q>Why,
it was you got up all this monastery business. You urged it, you
approved of it. Why are you angry now?</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>You've talked rot enough. You might rest a bit now,</q> Ivan
snapped sullenly.
</p>

<p>
Fyodor Pavlovitch was silent again for two minutes.
</p>

<p>
<q>A drop of brandy would be nice now,</q> he observed sententiously,
but Ivan made no response.
</p>

<p>
<q>You shall have some, too, when we get home.</q>
</p>

<p>
Ivan was still silent.
</p>

<p>
Fyodor Pavlovitch waited another two minutes.
</p>

<p>
<q>But I shall take Alyosha away from the monastery, though you
will dislike it so much, most honored Karl von Moor.</q>
</p>

<p>
Ivan shrugged his shoulders contemptuously, and turning away
stared at the road. And they did not speak again all the way home.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='097'/><anchor id='Pg097'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Book III. The Sensualists</head>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I. In The Servants' Quarters</head>

<p>
The Karamazovs' house was far from being in the center of the
town, but it was not quite outside it. It was a pleasant-looking
old house of two stories, painted gray, with a red iron roof. It was
roomy and snug, and might still last many years. There were all
sorts of unexpected little cupboards and closets and staircases. There
were rats in it, but Fyodor Pavlovitch did not altogether dislike
them. <q>One doesn't feel so solitary when one's left alone in the
evening,</q> he used to say. It was his habit to send the servants
away to the lodge for the night and to lock himself up alone. The
lodge was a roomy and solid building in the yard. Fyodor Pavlovitch
used to have the cooking done there, although there was a kitchen
in the house; he did not like the smell of cooking, and, winter and
summer alike, the dishes were carried in across the courtyard. The
house was built for a large family; there was room for five times
as many, with their servants. But at the time of our story there
was no one living in the house but Fyodor Pavlovitch and his son
Ivan. And in the lodge there were only three servants: old Grigory,
and his old wife Marfa, and a young man called Smerdyakov. Of
these three we must say a few words. Of old Grigory we have said
something already. He was firm and determined and went blindly
and obstinately for his object, if once he had been brought by any
reasons (and they were often very illogical ones) to believe that it
was immutably right. He was honest and incorruptible. His wife,
Marfa Ignatyevna, had obeyed her husband's will implicitly all her
life, yet she had pestered him terribly after the emancipation of the
serfs. She was set on leaving Fyodor Pavlovitch and opening a little
shop in Moscow with their small savings. But Grigory decided then,
<pb n='098'/><anchor id='Pg098'/>
once for all, that <q>the woman's talking nonsense, for every woman
is dishonest,</q> and that they ought not to leave their old master,
whatever he might be, for <q>that was now their duty.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Do you understand what duty is?</q> he asked Marfa Ignatyevna.
</p>

<p>
<q>I understand what duty means, Grigory Vassilyevitch, but why
it's our duty to stay here I never shall understand,</q> Marfa answered
firmly.
</p>

<p>
<q>Well, don't understand then. But so it shall be. And you hold
your tongue.</q>
</p>

<p>
And so it was. They did not go away, and Fyodor Pavlovitch
promised them a small sum for wages, and paid it regularly. Grigory
knew, too, that he had an indisputable influence over his master.
It was true, and he was aware of it. Fyodor Pavlovitch was an
obstinate and cunning buffoon, yet, though his will was strong
enough <q>in some of the affairs of life,</q> as he expressed it, he found
himself, to his surprise, extremely feeble in facing certain other
emergencies. He knew his weaknesses and was afraid of them.
There are positions in which one has to keep a sharp look out. And
that's not easy without a trustworthy man, and Grigory was a most
trustworthy man. Many times in the course of his life Fyodor
Pavlovitch had only just escaped a sound thrashing through Grigory's
intervention, and on each occasion the old servant gave him a
good lecture. But it wasn't only thrashings that Fyodor Pavlovitch
was afraid of. There were graver occasions, and very subtle
and complicated ones, when Fyodor Pavlovitch could not have explained
the extraordinary craving for some one faithful and devoted,
which sometimes unaccountably came upon him all in a
moment. It was almost a morbid condition. Corrupt and often
cruel in his lust, like some noxious insect, Fyodor Pavlovitch was
sometimes, in moments of drunkenness, overcome by superstitious
terror and a moral convulsion which took an almost physical form.
<q>My soul's simply quaking in my throat at those times,</q> he used to
say. At such moments he liked to feel that there was near at hand,
in the lodge if not in the room, a strong, faithful man, virtuous and
unlike himself, who had seen all his debauchery and knew all his
secrets, but was ready in his devotion to overlook all that, not to
oppose him, above all, not to reproach him or threaten him with
anything, either in this world or in the next, and, in case of need,
<pb n='099'/><anchor id='Pg099'/>
to defend him&mdash;from whom? From somebody unknown, but
terrible and dangerous. What he needed was to feel that there
was <emph>another</emph> man, an old and tried friend, that he might call him
in his sick moments merely to look at his face, or, perhaps, exchange
some quite irrelevant words with him. And if the old
servant were not angry, he felt comforted, and if he were angry,
he was more dejected. It happened even (very rarely however) that
Fyodor Pavlovitch went at night to the lodge to wake Grigory and
fetch him for a moment. When the old man came, Fyodor Pavlovitch
would begin talking about the most trivial matters, and would
soon let him go again, sometimes even with a jest. And after he
had gone, Fyodor Pavlovitch would get into bed with a curse and
sleep the sleep of the just. Something of the same sort had happened
to Fyodor Pavlovitch on Alyosha's arrival. Alyosha <q>pierced
his heart</q> by <q>living with him, seeing everything and blaming
nothing.</q> Moreover, Alyosha brought with him something his
father had never known before: a complete absence of contempt
for him and an invariable kindness, a perfectly natural unaffected
devotion to the old man who deserved it so little. All this was a
complete surprise to the old profligate, who had dropped all family
ties. It was a new and surprising experience for him, who had till
then loved nothing but <q>evil.</q> When Alyosha had left him, he
confessed to himself that he had learnt something he had not
till then been willing to learn.
</p>

<p>
I have mentioned already that Grigory had detested Adelaïda
Ivanovna, the first wife of Fyodor Pavlovitch and the mother of
Dmitri, and that he had, on the contrary, protected Sofya Ivanovna,
the poor <q>crazy woman,</q> against his master and any one who
chanced to speak ill or lightly of her. His sympathy for the unhappy
wife had become something sacred to him, so that even now,
twenty years after, he could not bear a slighting allusion to her
from any one, and would at once check the offender. Externally,
Grigory was cold, dignified and taciturn, and spoke, weighing his
words, without frivolity. It was impossible to tell at first sight
whether he loved his meek, obedient wife; but he really did love
her, and she knew it.
</p>

<p>
Marfa Ignatyevna was by no means foolish; she was probably, indeed,
cleverer than her husband, or, at least, more prudent than he
<pb n='100'/><anchor id='Pg100'/>
in worldly affairs, and yet she had given in to him in everything
without question or complaint ever since her marriage, and respected
him for his spiritual superiority. It was remarkable how little they
spoke to one another in the course of their lives, and only of the
most necessary daily affairs. The grave and dignified Grigory
thought over all his cares and duties alone, so that Marfa Ignatyevna
had long grown used to knowing that he did not need her
advice. She felt that her husband respected her silence, and took
it as a sign of her good sense. He had never beaten her but once,
and then only slightly. Once during the year after Fyodor Pavlovitch's
marriage with Adelaïda Ivanovna, the village girls and
women&mdash;at that time serfs&mdash;were called together before the house
to sing and dance. They were beginning <q>In the Green Meadows,</q>
when Marfa, at that time a young woman, skipped forward and
danced <q>the Russian Dance,</q> not in the village fashion, but as she
had danced it when she was a servant in the service of the rich
Miüsov family, in their private theater, where the actors were taught
to dance by a dancing master from Moscow. Grigory saw how his
wife danced, and, an hour later, at home in their cottage he gave
her a lesson, pulling her hair a little. But there it ended: the beating
was never repeated, and Marfa Ignatyevna gave up dancing.
</p>

<p>
God had not blessed them with children. One child was born
but it died. Grigory was fond of children, and was not ashamed of
showing it. When Adelaïda Ivanovna had run away, Grigory took
Dmitri, then a child of three years old, combed his hair and washed
him in a tub with his own hands, and looked after him for almost
a year. Afterwards he had looked after Ivan and Alyosha, for
which the general's widow had rewarded him with a slap in the
face; but I have already related all that. The only happiness his
own child had brought him had been in the anticipation of its birth.
When it was born, he was overwhelmed with grief and horror. The
baby had six fingers. Grigory was so crushed by this, that he was
not only silent till the day of the christening, but kept away in the
garden. It was spring, and he spent three days digging the kitchen
garden. The third day was fixed for christening the baby: mean-time
Grigory had reached a conclusion. Going into the cottage
where the clergy were assembled and the visitors had arrived, including
Fyodor Pavlovitch, who was to stand god-father, he suddenly
<pb n='101'/><anchor id='Pg101'/>
announced that the baby <q>ought not to be christened at all.</q>
He announced this quietly, briefly, forcing out his words, and gazing
with dull intentness at the priest.
</p>

<p>
<q>Why not?</q> asked the priest with good-humored surprise.
</p>

<p>
<q>Because it's a dragon,</q> muttered Grigory.
</p>

<p>
<q>A dragon? What dragon?</q>
</p>

<p>
Grigory did not speak for some time. <q>It's a confusion of nature,</q>
he muttered vaguely, but firmly, and obviously unwilling to
say more.
</p>

<p>
They laughed, and of course christened the poor baby. Grigory
prayed earnestly at the font, but his opinion of the new-born child
remained unchanged. Yet he did not interfere in any way. As long
as the sickly infant lived he scarcely looked at it, tried indeed not to
notice it, and for the most part kept out of the cottage. But when,
at the end of a fortnight, the baby died of thrush, he himself laid
the child in its little coffin, looked at it in profound grief, and when
they were filling up the shallow little grave he fell on his knees and
bowed down to the earth. He did not for years afterwards mention
his child, nor did Marfa speak of the baby before him, and, even if
Grigory were not present, she never spoke of it above a whisper.
Marfa observed that, from the day of the burial, he devoted himself
to <q>religion,</q> and took to reading the <hi rend='italic'>Lives of the Saints</hi>,
for the most part sitting alone and in silence, and always putting on his
big, round, silver-rimmed spectacles. He rarely read aloud, only
perhaps in Lent. He was fond of the Book of Job, and had somehow
got hold of a copy of the sayings and sermons of <q>the God-fearing
Father Isaac the Syrian,</q> which he read persistently for
years together, understanding very little of it, but perhaps prizing
and loving it the more for that. Of late he had begun to listen to
the doctrines of the sect of Flagellants settled in the neighborhood.
He was evidently shaken by them, but judged it unfitting to go
over to the new faith. His habit of theological reading gave him
an expression of still greater gravity.
</p>

<p>
He was perhaps predisposed to mysticism. And the birth of his
deformed child, and its death, had, as though by special design,
been accompanied by another strange and marvelous event, which,
as he said later, had left a <q>stamp</q> upon his soul. It happened that,
on the very night after the burial of his child, Marfa was awakened
<pb n='102'/><anchor id='Pg102'/>
by the wail of a new-born baby. She was frightened and waked
her husband. He listened and said he thought it was more like
some one groaning, <q>it might be a woman.</q> He got up and dressed.
It was a rather warm night in May. As he went down the steps, he
distinctly heard groans coming from the garden. But the gate from
the yard into the garden was locked at night, and there was no
other way of entering it, for it was enclosed all round by a strong,
high fence. Going back into the house, Grigory lighted a lantern,
took the garden key, and taking no notice of the hysterical fears of
his wife, who was still persuaded that she heard a child crying, and
that it was her own baby crying and calling for her, went into the
garden in silence. There he heard at once that the groans came from
the bath-house that stood near the garden gate, and that they were
the groans of a woman. Opening the door of the bath-house, he
saw a sight which petrified him. An idiot girl, who wandered about
the streets and was known to the whole town by the nickname of
Lizaveta Smerdyastchaya (Stinking Lizaveta), had got into the bath-house
and had just given birth to a child. She lay dying with the
baby beside her. She said nothing, for she had never been able to
speak. But her story needs a chapter to itself.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II. Lizaveta</head>

<p>
There was one circumstance which struck Grigory particularly,
and confirmed a very unpleasant and revolting suspicion. This
Lizaveta was a dwarfish creature, <q>not five foot within a wee bit,</q>
as many of the pious old women said pathetically about her, after
her death. Her broad, healthy, red face had a look of blank idiocy
and the fixed stare in her eyes was unpleasant, in spite of their meek
expression. She wandered about, summer and winter alike, barefooted,
wearing nothing but a hempen smock. Her coarse, almost
black hair curled like lamb's wool, and formed a sort of huge cap
on her head. It was always crusted with mud, and had leaves, bits
of stick, and shavings clinging to it, as she always slept on the
ground and in the dirt. Her father, a homeless, sickly drunkard,
<pb n='103'/><anchor id='Pg103'/>
called Ilya, had lost everything and lived many years as a workman
with some well-to-do tradespeople. Her mother had long been dead.
Spiteful and diseased, Ilya used to beat Lizaveta inhumanly whenever
she returned to him. But she rarely did so, for every one in
the town was ready to look after her as being an idiot, and so specially
dear to God. Ilya's employers, and many others in the town,
especially of the tradespeople, tried to clothe her better, and always
rigged her out with high boots and sheepskin coat for the winter.
But, although she allowed them to dress her up without resisting,
she usually went away, preferably to the cathedral porch, and
taking off all that had been given her&mdash;kerchief, sheepskin, skirt
or boots&mdash;she left them there and walked away barefoot in her
smock as before. It happened on one occasion that a new governor
of the province, making a tour of inspection in our town, saw
Lizaveta, and was wounded in his tenderest susceptibilities. And
though he was told she was an idiot, he pronounced that for a young
woman of twenty to wander about in nothing but a smock was a
breach of the proprieties, and must not occur again. But the governor
went his way, and Lizaveta was left as she was. At last her
father died, which made her even more acceptable in the eyes of
the religious persons of the town, as an orphan. In fact, every one
seemed to like her; even the boys did not tease her, and the boys of
our town, especially the schoolboys, are a mischievous set. She
would walk into strange houses, and no one drove her away. Every
one was kind to her and gave her something. If she were given a
copper, she would take it, and at once drop it in the alms-jug of
the church or prison. If she were given a roll or bun in the market,
she would hand it to the first child she met. Sometimes she would
stop one of the richest ladies in the town and give it to her, and the
lady would be pleased to take it. She herself never tasted anything
but black bread and water. If she went into an expensive shop,
where there were costly goods or money lying about, no one kept
watch on her, for they knew that if she saw thousands of roubles
overlooked by them, she would not have touched a farthing. She
scarcely ever went to church. She slept either in the church porch
or climbed over a hurdle (there are many hurdles instead of fences
to this day in our town) into a kitchen garden. She used at least
once a week to turn up <q>at home,</q> that is at the house of her
<pb n='104'/><anchor id='Pg104'/>
father's former employers, and in the winter went there every night,
and slept either in the passage or the cowhouse. People were amazed
that she could stand such a life, but she was accustomed to it, and,
although she was so tiny, she was of a robust constitution. Some of
the townspeople declared that she did all this only from pride, but
that is hardly credible. She could hardly speak, and only from
time to time uttered an inarticulate grunt. How could she have
been proud?
</p>

<p>
It happened one clear, warm, moonlight night in September
(many years ago) five or six drunken revelers were returning from
the club at a very late hour, according to our provincial notions.
They passed through the <q>back-way,</q> which led between the back
gardens of the houses, with hurdles on either side. This way leads
out on to the bridge over the long, stinking pool which we were
accustomed to call a river. Among the nettles and burdocks under
the hurdle our revelers saw Lizaveta asleep. They stopped to look
at her, laughing, and began jesting with unbridled licentiousness.
It occurred to one young gentleman to make the whimsical inquiry
whether any one could possibly look upon such an animal as a
woman, and so forth.... They all pronounced with lofty repugnance
that it was impossible. But Fyodor Pavlovitch, who was
among them, sprang forward and declared that it was by no means
impossible, and that, indeed, there was a certain piquancy about it,
and so on.... It is true that at that time he was overdoing his
part as a buffoon. He liked to put himself forward and entertain
the company, ostensibly on equal terms, of course, though in reality
he was on a servile footing with them. It was just at the time when
he had received the news of his first wife's death in Petersburg, and,
with crape upon his hat, was drinking and behaving so shamelessly
that even the most reckless among us were shocked at the sight of
him. The revelers, of course, laughed at this unexpected opinion;
and one of them even began challenging him to act upon it. The
others repelled the idea even more emphatically, although still with
the utmost hilarity, and at last they went on their way. Later on,
Fyodor Pavlovitch swore that he had gone with them, and perhaps
it was so, no one knows for certain, and no one ever knew. But
five or six months later, all the town was talking, with intense and
sincere indignation, of Lizaveta's condition, and trying to find out
<pb n='105'/><anchor id='Pg105'/>
who was the miscreant who had wronged her. Then suddenly a
terrible rumor was all over the town that this miscreant was no
other than Fyodor Pavlovitch. Who set the rumor going? Of
that drunken band five had left the town and the only one still
among us was an elderly and much respected civil councilor, the
father of grown-up daughters, who could hardly have spread the
tale, even if there had been any foundation for it. But rumor
pointed straight at Fyodor Pavlovitch, and persisted in pointing at
him. Of course this was no great grievance to him: he would not
have troubled to contradict a set of tradespeople. In those days he
was proud, and did not condescend to talk except in his own circle
of the officials and nobles, whom he entertained so well.
</p>

<p>
At the time, Grigory stood up for his master vigorously. He
provoked quarrels and altercations in defense of him and succeeded
in bringing some people round to his side. <q>It's the wench's own
fault,</q> he asserted, and the culprit was Karp, a dangerous convict,
who had escaped from prison and whose name was well known to us,
as he had hidden in our town. This conjecture sounded plausible,
for it was remembered that Karp had been in the neighborhood just
at that time in the autumn, and had robbed three people. But this
affair and all the talk about it did not estrange popular sympathy
from the poor idiot. She was better looked after than ever. A
well-to-do merchant's widow named Kondratyev arranged to take
her into her house at the end of April, meaning not to let her go
out until after the confinement. They kept a constant watch over
her, but in spite of their vigilance she escaped on the very last day,
and made her way into Fyodor Pavlovitch's garden. How, in her
condition, she managed to climb over the high, strong fence remained
a mystery. Some maintained that she must have been lifted
over by somebody; others hinted at something more uncanny. The
most likely explanation is that it happened naturally&mdash;that Lizaveta,
accustomed to clambering over hurdles to sleep in gardens, had somehow
managed to climb this fence, in spite of her condition, and had
leapt down, injuring herself.
</p>

<p>
Grigory rushed to Marfa and sent her to Lizaveta, while he ran
to fetch an old midwife who lived close by. They saved the baby,
but Lizaveta died at dawn. Grigory took the baby, brought it home,
and making his wife sit down, put it on her lap. <q>A child of God&mdash;an
<pb n='106'/><anchor id='Pg106'/>
orphan is akin to all,</q> he said, <q>and to us above others. Our
little lost one has sent us this, who has come from the devil's son
and a holy innocent. Nurse him and weep no more.</q>
</p>

<p>
So Marfa brought up the child. He was christened Pavel, to
which people were not slow in adding Fyodorovitch (son of Fyodor).
Fyodor Pavlovitch did not object to any of this, and thought it
amusing, though he persisted vigorously in denying his responsibility.
The townspeople were pleased at his adopting the foundling. Later
on, Fyodor Pavlovitch invented a surname for the child, calling him
Smerdyakov, after his mother's nickname.
</p>

<p>
So this Smerdyakov became Fyodor Pavlovitch's second servant,
and was living in the lodge with Grigory and Marfa at the time our
story begins. He was employed as cook. I ought to say something
of this Smerdyakov, but I am ashamed of keeping my readers' attention
so long occupied with these common menials, and I will go back
to my story, hoping to say more of Smerdyakov in the course of it.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III. The Confession Of A Passionate Heart&mdash;In Verse</head>

<p>
Alyosha remained for some time irresolute after hearing the
command his father shouted to him from the carriage. But
in spite of his uneasiness he did not stand still. That was not his
way. He went at once to the kitchen to find out what his father
had been doing above. Then he set off, trusting that on the way
he would find some answer to the doubt tormenting him. I hasten
to add that his father's shouts, commanding him to return home
<q>with his mattress and pillow</q> did not frighten him in the least.
He understood perfectly that those peremptory shouts were merely
<q>a flourish</q> to produce an effect. In the same way a tradesman in
our town who was celebrating his name-day with a party of friends,
getting angry at being refused more vodka, smashed up his own
crockery and furniture and tore his own and his wife's clothes, and
finally broke his windows, all for the sake of effect. Next day, of
course, when he was sober, he regretted the broken cups and saucers.
Alyosha knew that his father would let him go back to the monastery
<pb n='107'/><anchor id='Pg107'/>
next day, possibly even that evening. Moreover, he was fully persuaded
that his father might hurt any one else, but would not hurt
him. Alyosha was certain that no one in the whole world ever would
want to hurt him, and, what is more, he knew that no one could
hurt him. This was for him an axiom, assumed once for all without
question, and he went his way without hesitation, relying on it.
</p>

<p>
But at that moment an anxiety of a different sort disturbed him,
and worried him the more because he could not formulate it. It was
the fear of a woman, of Katerina Ivanovna, who had so urgently
entreated him in the note handed to him by Madame Hohlakov to
come and see her about something. This request and the necessity
of going had at once aroused an uneasy feeling in his heart, and this
feeling